I think we're good to go, Senator.
>> Great. Um, well, welcome everybody.
Thank you for being here for the first
uh meeting of the joint committee on
cyber security, IT, and biotechnology of
2025.
Uh for anybody who's just tuning tuning
in for the first time, my name is
Senator Katie Fry Hester. I represent
District 9, which is Howard and
Montgomery counties, and I have the
honor of co-chairing this committee
along with my uh colleague, uh delegate
and co-chair Ann Kaiser from District
14. Today's topic, um we'll be looking
at artificial intelligence and how it is
being used, sorry, in the government
here in Maryland and across the country.
Um, artificial intelligence, as you all
know, is no longer a distant concept.
It's definitely accelerating and it's
here to stay, shaping how we deliver,
uh, vital constituent services. Um,
Delegate Kaiser, would you like to
briefly say hello?
>> Uh, certainly. I, uh, thank you, Senator
Hester. Thank you for all our colleagues
joining us. Thank you for everyone else
who'll be speaking today and for any,
uh, guests listening in. And I just want
to uh remind people that uh we in the
Maryland legislature are citizen
legislators, meaning that we hold uh
multiple jobs. Uh and just to explain
that some of our members might be in and
we might have just lost um
Cher Kaiser. I think what she was saying
is that we all hold um multiple jobs and
so some of our members will be watching
online and some will be watching you
know later this evening. So the audience
is actually bigger than it looks right
now. Um I'd just like to acknowledge the
other committee members uh who we have
who we have um on the committee. We have
um Senator Cheryl Kagan, Senator Ron
Watson, Senator Jim Rosep, Senator
Michael Jackson, Senator JB Jennings,
and Senator Steve Hershey. And today
here we have Delegate Terry Hill,
Delegate Sandy Bartlett, um Delegate Ken
Kerr, uh Delegate Nip Kiki, uh will join
us later, Delegate Jessica Feldmark, and
in case I didn't say, Delegate Sandy
Bartlett. So, we've got a great lineup
here to um to look at everything that's
going on. Um, Chair Kaiser, we lost you
for a second. Are you back? Did you want
to finish what you were saying?
>> I think you had me covered, Senator, as
always. You do a superb job. Thank you.
>> Oh, you make you make me look good,
Chair Kaiser. Thank you. Um, so the
breadth of voices we'll hear today
should give us really clear view of both
the opportunities and the challenges we
have ahead. And I'd like to thank all of
our panelists for being here and look
forward to a thoughtful discussion. Um
we're going to hear today from um a a
great lineup. Um we've got first a
national our federal perspective from
the National Conference of State
Legislators. Then we're going to turn to
uh Maryland's Department of Information
Technology for an update on their AI
enablement priorities. We're joined by
Secretary Katie Savage and um AI senior
adviser Nishant Shaw. Uh then we'll hear
from three Maryland agencies on their uh
implementation thus far of artificial
intelligence. And then we're going to um
uh be joined by representatives from
Denver and from Oregon State um and hear
uh kind of what they're doing um and
also some perspectives from other states
presented by uh a representative from
the public sector at Google. Um so that
is our lineup. Um I guess with that I
will um
I think we are starting first with the
National Council of State Legislators.
I'll turn it over to Barry Tabin, the
senior legislative director of federal
affairs for NCSL. She is our resident
expert on AI legislation and AI
executive action at the federal level
and how it is impacting states. Uh over
to you, Miss Tabin.
>> Hello and thank you Senator Hester and
welcome to everybody. Welcome Delegate
Kaiser and Secretary Savage and members
of the committee. Um so I Oh, yay. Here
I am. Okay. So, I do have a presentation
to share. Um, and we are going to try to
get that for you. Hang on one second
everybody and then I'll introduce
myself.
So,
let's see. Um,
>> are you able to share, Barry, or do we
need to enable that for you?
>> I don't know. Let's see.
>> I see it. We're good. We see it.
>> Yay. Oh my god. Participants can now see
your application. Excellent. Let me just
do one thing. Um, how do I You can see
it here, but what I'm having trouble is
how do I get to the next page?
Um
because you can see the
um
>> in your own presentation, whatever
allowed you to draw it up, you can just
be on your page with the presentation
and you should be able to scroll
through.
>> Okay, hang on.
>> Your own presentation and it should
connect.
>> Well, there we go. I don't know what I
just did there that enabled me to
>> Hey, Delegate Kaiser.
>> Oh, okay. Hang on, folks. Yes, it's
wonderful when the technology person um
Okay, can you Oh, the screen has closed.
Okay, so you're not seeing me anymore,
correct?
>> We can see your face. We can't see your
presentation,
>> right? All right, let's have to go back
to the share button.
>> Let's try one more time.
Can you see it now?
>> Yes.
>> Oh, excellent. Okay, terrific. Now I'm
all good to go. Okay, folks. Perfect.
So, thank you so much. So, I work for
the National Conference of State
Legislatures. I'm a senior legislative
director there, and I don't know how
many of you are familiar with NCSL. Um,
the members are legislaturures or
legislators around the country. Um,
and we're a very bipartisan group. We
are both in Denver and in Washington DC.
and I'm in our Washington DC office and
I lead our technology advocacy before
Congress and I work with a small team of
terrific folks. I also work very closely
with Senator Hester and some other
legislators from around the country
because I staff a technology task force
and a technology committee and I welcome
anybody on the call today to you know
reach out and learn a little bit more
about that. Um, so the senator asked me
if I could talk a little bit about um
some of the happenings at the federal
level. Um, specifically,
hang on. Let's see if we can Oh,
perfect. Specifically, um, President
Trump's AI action plan and some of the
recent executive orders that he's
issued. And so, you know, I'm happy to
roll any way that you folks feel
comfortable. I can do the presentation.
You can ask me questions at the end if
you have something important while I'm
speaking and you want to jump right in.
I have no trouble at all being
interrupted. Um, we'll talk a little bit
about what's happening at the federal
level. I tried to think a little bit
about what this might mean for Maryland.
I have some thoughts I'd like to share
about what's happening in other states.
We have about 20 minutes, so we'll go
from there. Okay. And if and hopefully
we'll keep moving on the presentation
and you can see the slides. Correct
everybody? now.
>> Perfect. Okay. Okay. Wonderful. Okay.
So, let's begin. All right. So, it was a
busy summer um for federal activity and
remember I'm focusing on, you know, what
the president did. Um and Congress is
always in the backyard too, right? Like
thinking about what they should be doing
and how they should be moving ahead from
on AI. We can cover that a little bit,
but mostly we're talking here about
executive action. So in July um the
Trump administration moved forward with
what they called a federal AI action
plan. And the one thing I sort of want
to level set right at at the beginning
is that this is really about how federal
agencies interact with AI, right? So it
doesn't have specific implications for
state and local governments. It's really
about federal agency activity except,
and here's where I'm going to qualify
that. If you look at the second bullet,
it talks about urging withhold of
federal funds from states with overly
burdensome AI laws. So the one way that
this action plan can impact states and
local governments is to say that if the
if the action plan mandates something
and states and local governments don't
want to comply potentially the federal
government could withhold some funds.
And so one of the things the action plan
says is of course states should be great
innovators but to the extent that they
overly burden AI um the federal
government can withhold funds from
states and I want to just just briefly
dig into what that meant. So
specifically, the action plan talks
about the Office of Management and
Budget and specific agencies withholding
discretionary AI related funds if a
state's law is found to hinder AI. So
we're not exactly sure what it means by
discretionary AI funds. There don't seem
to be so many lurking right at this
moment, but again, potentially we don't
know what's going to happen in the
future. and somebody is thinking about
withholding money from states um if they
are found to have overly burdensome AI
ranks. Another thing I wanted to point
out that's specific in the action plan
and then interestingly I just read about
this morning um has to do with the
Federal Communications Commission. So,
um, the Federal Communications
Commission has a very broad mandate to
advance telecommunication services. And
one of the things the chairman of the
FCC is saying, Brendan Carr, is that he
may able he may be able to under that
mandate preempt state laws that have
burdensome quote unquote AI regulations.
In other words, to argue that these
regulations, these laws are interfering
with the provision of telecommunication
services. Now, I've been working on
these issues for a long time. I think,
as do many folks, that that would be a
very big stretch, but again, you can see
that the federal government is thinking
about ways to preempt state and local
governments in the AI arena, and they
talk about that in the action plan. So,
I just wanted to elevate that for you
folks. Now, the next three bullets
really had a lot of bipartisan support
very interestingly and at NCSL we've
been working with a lot of civil society
groups on the preeemption and even these
civil society organizations came out in
support of many of these next three
bullets. And of course, one is
emphasizing workforce developments, AI
skills in education and training and
measures to address job displacement.
And I wanted to say that specifically
what the action plan really did is talk
about having agencies like labor and
commerce and education and then also
state and local governments
promote the integration of AI skill
development in a host of programs. So
like career and technical education,
workforce training, apprenticeships and
really there is quite a lot in the AI
action plan about workforce. So clearly
folks have been thinking about it.
They're concerned with it. This is both
at the federal level and at the state
and local level. The programs around the
national AI research resource pilot and
the centers of excellence would connect
an increasing number of researchers and
educators across the country to critical
AI resources and that would enable them
to rapidly deploy and test AI tools and
then commit to sharing what they've
learned. And that whole idea of testing
and learning and sharing best practices
is very much supportive, you know,
supported on both sides of the aisle.
And lastly, um the plan talks about
encouraging regulatory sandboxes. And I
think a lot of you are familiar with the
idea of regulatory sandboxes. So it's
promoting innovation without having to
comply with all existing regulations.
Now, this is at the federal level, but
one thing I think it's important to
point out is again, um, you know, the
the action plan is broad federal
priorities. And with regard to the
regulatory sandbox, Senator Ted Cruz
from Texas, he just introduced a bill
effectively trying to make the whole
idea of a sandbox a law. And it's called
the Sandbox Act. It's S2750.
It's a federal bill and it talks about
promoting a regulatory sandbox but not
just with federal agencies actually in
the private sector. So the private
sector would have an innovation. They'd
be able to come forward and say we want
to apply for a waiver of federal rags in
order to move forward with our you know
innovation. So it's it's a regulatory
sandbox aimed at the private sector
exempting them from federal rank. So
again, this gives you a little bit of an
idea of how the action plan is being
translated into um into potential law.
Okay, let's go ahead and keep going. Oh,
perfect. All right, here's a little bit
more about the action plan. So again,
directing the National Institute for um
science and technology
um to develop some AI oversight tools
and standards for evaluating AI systems.
And this is the idea of developing some
standardization for measuring and
evaluating the safety and effectiveness
of AI and then again sharing those
learnings and best practices. So um to
the administration's credit and I think
other folks would agree that there was a
lot on standardization on sharing on
research on workforce that folks were
very happy to see folks on both sides of
the aisle. Um there's quite a bit on
streamlining permitting for data centers
and energy infrastructure and then
interestingly that's mentioned in the
action plan and then also in its own
executive order. So we'll elaborate on
that when we get to the executive order.
There's also support for cyber security
via AI threat intelligence sharing. And
this is really about establishing an AI
information sharing and analysis center
to promote the sharing of AI security
threat information and intelligence
across all of the US critical
infrastructure sectors. And there's sort
of, you know, that's kind of interesting
because at the federal level, we've seen
quite a bit of cutting for CISA and some
of these other threat agencies. And so
it's kind of interesting then that in
the action plan this idea is being
elevated. So that's something to think a
little bit about. Um also a lot of
discussion on revising federal guidance
to remove references to DEI to
misinformation and to climate. And then
again there's a section on how we engage
internationally and biocurity
investment. So that is a very brief
overview of the AI action plan and at
the end in my resources I put a link to
it and you can always go ahead and read
it you know at your leisure so to speak
if you would like. Um all right so now
let's go on
to talk about the three executive orders
which build on the action plan. So this
slide is really an overview of the three
of them, right? That the president
issued three AI focused executive orders
in 2025.
And generally speaking, the orders aim
to boost US leadership in the artificial
intelligence arena. And then they focus
on the key areas that the executive
orders focus on are infrastructure,
international competitiveness and
governance. and they focus on
fast-tracking AI data center permits and
exports and then emphasizing
ideological neutrality in federal AI
governance. And you know, I tried to
sort of think a little bit about what
this may mean for Maryland. Again,
there's no mandate that the state do
anything, but it's the idea that if you
see these as federal priorities, you
know, what does that mean for your
activity? what might be coming down the
pack up down the pike that could require
you to do A, B, and C. So, it's not a
bad idea to think about what you're
doing in terms of data centers and your
own governance standards.
Um, so now let's jump into the executive
orders. Okay. So, the first one I'm
going to discuss has to do with data
center infrastructure. You see the
number, it's 14318. It's called
accelerating federal permitting of data
center infrastructure. And again, I
linked to all of the um executive orders
at the back if you'd like to read them.
So, this one mandates federal agency
support for fast buildouts of
infrastructure. It also encourages the
use of federal lands for rapid AI data
center growth and it calls for
streamlined environmental and permitting
reviews. So, let's just kind of dig into
that a little bit. It talks about
establishing new categor categorical
exclusions under the national
environmental policy act to cover data
center related actions that normally
don't have a significant effect on the
environment. And it also discusses
expediting environmental permitting by
streamlining or reducing regulations
promulgated under the clean air act, the
clean water act and then sort of like um
laws.
And then again we talked about making
federal lands available for data center
construction and the construction of
power generation infrastructure for
those data centers. Um, it specifically
revokes a President Biden 2024 order on
AI infrastructure that moved, I think
maybe one would argue, in a little more
balanced way when it looked at
environmental issues and innovation. The
President Trump executive order is a bit
more aggressive in terms of its
pro-development policy. And then I
wanted to note that I know that
Maryland, and maybe this is not the
exact thing you did, but I believe that
I read something about the state also um
enacting some recent legislation, the
critical infrastructure streamlining act
of 2024. I don't know if that's
something anybody wants to talk about,
but there was some a suggestion that
might that kind of complements that
you're looking at these issues as well
in Maryland. um just to streamline some
regulations for data centers and
generators and other states across the
country are similarly doing that. So
just to make a note of that uh one state
that comes to mind definitely is Texas.
So this is the data center um
executive order. Now let's go on and
we'll talk a little bit about promoting
the export of American AI technology
stack. And I must admit I hadn't dug
into this one until I was asked to
present here. So I did a little review.
This is 14320.
And really the goal of this one is
really the second bullet. Aiming to
promote American AI leadership worldwide
to strengthen the US AI industry
globally and counter rival tech
influence. And a lot of what I hear in
my advocacy and my work is the need for
us to move move because we are in a
battle with China. Um, and I think that
in fact seems to be sort of the goal of
this executive order. And what it really
does is it launches a comprehensive
program to boost AI exports. And one of
the things I read about the program is
it supports companies offering endtoend
AI solutions rather than just individual
components. So you can see in the first
bullet um they talk about bundles like
bundling hardware, software and
services. Um again there's a focus on um
specific priority projects like AI for
education for health and for
agriculture. Um the program requires
strict compliance with US export
controls. And then to sort of elevate
and enhance the program, there's a
discussion about governmentwide
diplomacy with the countries that our
companies will be selling to. And then a
bunch of financing and other options for
companies involved in the program. So
tools, resources to accelerate
deployment and other marketing and
promotional opportunities. Um, and for
Maryland and other states around the
country, we're not entirely sure, but it
could potentially be the idea if
Maryland companies are involved in this
program that you're opening new global
markets and that, you know, you're
you're creating jobs in the state. So,
that's something to think a little bit
about and I think something that I think
some other states are thinking about as
well.
The last executive order
and this is the actual name of it. It is
called preventing woke AI in the federal
government. It is 14319
and it requires AI systems used by again
federal agencies to prioritize
truthfulness. So I did a little digging
as to what that meant and it was factual
objective responses and ideological
neutrality. So to not favor any
political or social agenda and to help
with that I just wanted to read
something from the executive order. So
in explaining this here's an example
they gave. One major AI model changed
the race and sex of historical figures
including the pope, the founding fathers
and Vikings when prompted for images
because it was trained to prioritize DEI
requirements at the cost of accuracy. So
in explaining this um executive order
that was one of the examples that was
provided I think to sort of help folks
understand what the administration was
trying to get at. Um OM is to issue
procurement guidance enforcing these
principles within 120 days. So that's
the next month or so. Um there are
clauses to terminate vendors who violate
truth or neutrality requirements. Of
course, there's concern about diversity,
equity, and inclusion language um in any
contracts that distort AI outputs. And
again, with regard to Maryland and other
states, there's no mandate at this time,
but it may not be a bad idea to just see
um what a state is thinking and doing in
this kind of, you know, bias area,
neutrality area um for potentially
needing at some point to align with
these federal standards.
Okay. And then lastly,
okay, folks, we're going to get to the
next page.
Perfect. And here are just this is just
sort of a repeat of some of the other um
pages. the idea that the federal
government is aggressively promoting AI
development and deployment and then sort
of kind of a recap of the other ex of
the executive orders, streamlining
permits, um pushing AI technology into
the global market to grow our
leadership, and then setting a federal
baseline for AI conduct that favors a
very narrow definition of what
neutrality is. Um and then again just
the idea that Maryland and all states
may be able to leverage infrastructure
and export growth opportunities and also
think about their own bias and
governance policies. And then at the
very end you can see if I just have
resources, you can link to the action
plan um and all of the different um
executive orders and then some other um
documents that I thought were of
interest. Um there you go folks. So, I'm
happy to answer any questions anybody
might have. Um,
open to discussion. Ah, Delegate Kaiser
has a question. And Senator Hester, do
you want to feel the questions? How do
you want whatever you think?
>> Sure. Let's I'll I'll see who else has
their hand up after an
>> Okay.
>> Uh, thank you, Miss Haven. Um, and I
think I'm finally on camera. Uh my my
question has to do with the um I just
turned it on. My question has to do with
the second executive order and about the
permitting and such. I understand that
the environmental permitting and some
other things would be under federal
purview, but I presume that uh most
states or localities have the zoning
authority in these cases. So, what if
anything is the federal government what
is any what if anything is being
suggested in this executive order to
overrule a local zoning? Is there
anything related to that?
>> No, there isn't anything related to
that. It really is just about um federal
regulations. It doesn't discuss, as far
as I understand, it doesn't discuss
local zoning. And it's interesting,
Delegate Kaiser, because when I was
preparing for this, I went to look at,
you know, what is happening around the
country with data centers and I found
that, you know, some of the challenges,
of course, with sighting are, you know,
local zoning requirements. So, the
executive order at this time doesn't
address local zoning. It just addresses,
you know, permitting and environmental
regulations at the federal level.
>> All right. Thank you.
>> Okay. Great.
>> Thank you.
I am not seeing any other questions at
this time time Miss Tabin. Um but if we
if we do you know members when they're
watching um either you know now or later
please feel free to send um send
comments um in and we will pass them
along to to Miss Tabin. Um
>> absolutely.
>> Thank you. Thank you so so very very
much.
>> Oh absolutely. Yep. Any questions, feel
free and I'm and I'm glad to to feel
them. I appreciate it and wonderful.
Thank you for having me and everybody
have a great day. Okay,
>> thank you.
>> Bye
>> bye.
>> Fabulous. Um so we'll now move on to the
next uh
you know our next section. Um, I'd like
to welcome Secretary Savage and her team
to give us an update on the artificial
intelligence roadmap for the state of
Maryland and in what we're doing, you
know, across the state. You guys have
been very hard at work and I know that
you've got limited staff, but you've got
brought the best and brightest with you
today. So, over to you, Secretary
Savage.
>> Good morning, Chair Huster and Chair
Kaiser and members of the committee.
Thank you for having us. I'll be brief
in my remarks. Um, as you pointed out,
we have grown the AI AI enablement team
over the past year. Um, so we now have a
team of four and we're looking to expand
that through fellowship and internship
opportunities that we've been uh that
we've been exploring with the governor's
office. U, we appreciate the opportunity
to share the significant progress that
we've made on our 2025 AI strategy and
roadmap as well as implementing the
requirements of SB818.
Uh thanks to the excellent work of our
team and the partnership with you all,
Maryland stands to be at the forefront
of leveraging AI and uh in particular to
improve government services. Uh we are
going to point out today some of the
innovations that we think will improve
efficiency while expanding the
accessibility of some of our systems. So
with that, I'll turn it over to our AI
enablement team who will tell you more
about the state's progress.
>> Thank you, Secretary Savage. Uh I'm
Nishant. I'm uh senior adviser for
responsible AI at do it. I think I've
met many of the folks on this call and
it's great to see uh many of you again.
Um as secretary service has mentioned
we've got a small but mighty team today
uh presenting uh including Ray Bell who
leads our uh product work around IML,
Solomon who leads AI governance and
Lauren who is a program uh senior
program manager on our team. Uh next
slide please.
So here's our agenda uh for today. Our
goal is really to give you a strong
sense of our progress on AI enablement
efforts across the state and there's a
lot happening right now. Um it feels
like things are changing weekly, you
know, some bottom up, some top down,
some do it led, others led by sister
agencies. Uh but hopefully this gives
you a feel for for where we are. Next
slide.
So, I think most folks on this call have
probably heard Secretary Savage or I say
this a number of times now, but I think
it's worth reiterating what we're
working towards. Um, our vision is, you
know, the state of Maryland responsibly,
ethically, productively leverages a IML
technologies to significantly improve
constituent outcomes and reduce drudgery
for the state workforce. And we really
do this by building a robust and
adaptable policy, process, technical,
talent, and cultural foundation uh
that'll serve Maryland no matter the
direction that AI ML technologies
evolve.
Next slide, please.
So, no, I think those are, you know,
pretty obvious things to shoot for. Um,
but I think the crucial element here
really is, are we building and enabling
AI in a way that a really takes into
account how fast this technology is
changing? B that meets agencies where
they are today and C does so in a way
that starts acrewing the benefits of AI
in the state while mitigating the risks
and avoiding lock in. So on that front
we launched the AI enablement team back
in January and our charter is really to
build foundations incubate approaches
create policy and guidance advise
agencies and then catalyze
experimentation to drive responsible
adoption. We're a very small team. So
what we need to focus on at any given
time is essentially what is most high
leverage. And our work this year has
focused on pushing forward the 2025 AI
strategy and roadmap that the AI subc
cabinet published in January and
ensuring also that we've implemented all
the requirements of SB818, the AI
governance act of 2024. And so we'll
leverage the remainder of this
presentation uh for the various folks on
the AI enablement team to discuss
progress against each one of the five
pillars of the 2025 strategy. Now the
first pillar uh of the strategy is
really the foundation for all the rest.
You know build a governance
infrastructure that lets us mitigate
risks, ensure transparency and move
confidently towards more ambitious uses
of AI to solve agency problems. So Dr.
Dr. Solomon Abiola is our brilliant lead
for conceptualizing and building out and
operationalizing this infrastructure. Uh
Solomon, over to you.
>> Cool. Thank you for that intro. Uh
Nishant, so I will talk about some of
the progress if we go to the next. Yep.
Our uh that we've been making on the
responsible AI policy. So earlier last
year uh we had the interimm guidance. uh
this year we were able to ship the
responsible AI policy which replaces
last year's AI interim guidance and
enables AI agencies to basically
safeguard against harms. Now, one of the
key things that's in this policy is
really trying to focus on a
classification system for risk. That
being unacceptable use cases of AI,
which are covered in the executive order
in SB818, but really trying to get
agencies to understand what is high
risk, what is limited risk, and what is
minimal risk. And to that uh effort we
provided additional implementation
guidance to really give specific
examples and to help agencies in their
journey as they think around safeguards
thinking around data classification and
how that pertains to the actual usage of
AI. So if you go to the next slide.
So we created a uh intake process and
that's outlined in our guidance document
that's publicly available on the do
website. But really this was designed to
capture AI use cases. And the step one
of that was really trying to build out
our AI inventory which we understand is
due uh later this year. But first we had
to be able to assign risk of new use
cases that were coming in through our
classification policies. And being an AI
enablement team, one of the things we
really have leaned into is leveraging uh
some of our AI solutions to actually dog
food our technology. So what that means
is we've taken our AI policy, our
guidance uh and so forth and we've put
that into an AI service that internally
we have used to help accelerate the
review of AI items and help improve our
overall uh intake process. We've also
supplemented uh this the policies with
additional AI guidance uh in the form
basically short cards that we call them.
uh they're a little bit stronger than a
memo but lighter than a policy and they
really focus on specific AI use cases.
So one of the really big ones that has
come up is obviously using AI for
transcription um you know we're two
parties uh consent state and so we
really put out guidance to agencies
around how can they use some of the
Gemini uh recording uh software and also
be respective of our state laws and
policies. In addition to that, we've put
out guidance around using enterprise
tools like Gemini itself. And as we look
towards the future, we are putting out
additional guidance around how we can
start using AI in coding assistance and
other uh applications.
So if you move to the next slide.
So all of this is set, you know,
obviously the foundation for us being
able to build out a strong AI inventory.
And part of that, you know, is obviously
being driven by we have to comply with
uh legislation here, but really it's
allowing our agencies to also see the
art of the possible, what other agencies
are doing. We are almost at 100 AI use
cases. We're working very closely with
agencies that are exploring uh
high-risisk use cases, but I will be
clear that none of those cases are
currently in production. Um, but part of
that process involves doing things like
a privacy impact assessment, algorithmic
impact assessment, and really making
sure that these AI use cases are in
compliance with both our AI policy, the
executive order, and SV818. We are
aiming in the next few months uh to make
this publicly available uh in December
per legislation and my colleague Lauren
will talk later about some of the
efforts that are uh going to be in place
to make that publicly accessible. So
with that I will turn it over uh back to
you Nash.
>> Fantastic. Thank you Solomon. Um so in
addition to AI governance you know a
crucial foundation for building AI that
works is the state of our data. Um and I
believe a number of you were at the data
workshop a few weeks ago uh hosted by
Senator Hester and our state chief data
officer Natalie Evans Harris. And the
work covered during that workshop is
really the work of this pillar um
primarily led by Natalie to ensure that
the state's data is ready to power AI
systems and sort of avoid this garbage
in garbage out scenario. And we've made
progress on a number of fronts here. You
know the office of enterprise data has
shipped a data classification policy for
example which is a crucial policy to
have in place that our responsible AI
policy builds on top of. It essentially
determines the risk level of the data
that to be used in an AI system which
then determines the guard rails that it
needs. Um OED has also identified uh
authoritative data sources across the
state and these are those data sets that
are particularly foundational to state
workflows. So these are you know the
clear places to target to increase
quality, catalyze data sharing and
reduce duplication. Um, and from an AI
perspective, you know, this helps uh
essentially point the way to data sets
that are particularly helpful in
powering AI systems. We're also in the
midst of drafting a data readiness
policy for AI that is a set of criteria
that spells out exactly how to use data
in AI systems and provides an artifact
and checklist for agencies to follow uh
when building proofs of concept or
scaling a solution. And I'm particularly
excited about this one uh because it'll
be in a sort of very actionable part of
the playbook that agencies can use when
building AI solutions. And finally, OBD
is launching a data academy which will
upskill state data professionals in a
lot of different ways, but which will
also include AI modules and more uh
around upskilling in just a bit in in
Lauren's section as well. So in
aggregate you know these pieces get us
further along the maturity curve so that
state data sets have pathways to
becoming AI ready.
So moving on to our third strategic
pillar um building momentum around
experimentation and adoption. You know
this is really the crux of the work. Uh
we've made a lot of strides here from
building out the AI enablement team to
establishing and executing a range of
experimentation channels to rolling out
tools to building playbooks and our
great AIML product director Dr. Ray Bell
really takes point in a lot of these
efforts from do its end. Uh so Ray over
to you.
>> Thank you very much Nishant. Um good
morning Senator Hester Chair Hester and
Chair Kaiser. Um as well as the
committee members. It's a pleasure to be
here today to present to you all. Um for
those of you who haven't met you, my
name is Ray Bell. As Nishant said, I'm
the IML product director. I joined the
state in January and I've been
incredibly excited to be a part of this
increasingly accelerated journey that
the AI enablement team is doing in terms
of allowing folks to use AI responsibly
and productively in the state.
I'm going to start after what Solomon
said um speaking about intake and how we
are being uh increasingly focused in
terms of the momentum in which we're
offering as tickets are coming in
through intake we are taking a proactive
approach in terms of what people are
asking for um what they currently have
access to um things they want to do so
the the top bullet point here is really
saying that we're going to take a a
holistic approach as an agency and as a
state to um kind centrally think about
where does the department of IT manage
enterprise AI tools? What does that fit
in and how do they solve that? Um I
really look forward to taking on that
work. This year has been a a really
foundational year for us to offer
enterprise AI tools to our workforce. So
starting around springtime um Google
offered Gemini available uh at no cost
and this is really a success story of
the department of IT. Um so I want to
take a moment just to talk about this
roll out and the steps that we took to
do this um with best practices in mind.
First of all it was a an approach kind
of with the the best minds the
department of it. So we put together AI,
security, privacy, legal um to come
together and say you know is this
something that we want to offer? Is this
something we want to assess and ensure
that this adheres to our security, our
privacies? Um how can we monitor this
usage? Once the tiger team kind of
agreed upon that this is a useful thing
um we can roll it roll it out to the
department of it and then we've also
done monitoring and governance upon this
um so we can see how people are using it
um what are they using it for um those
types of things I would say this has
been a great opportunity for us to work
with various CIOS across the state um
you know we've given them a choice of if
when how they would like to use this and
we've really been a sounded ward for
questions that come up. Um, we're happy
to answer their their concerns or
issues. Um, and those CIOS who have used
this, rolled out to their workforce,
they've been incredibly supportive of
this and saying it really has been um, a
fundamental change into allowing their
workforce to do more with less.
As some statistics on this, about one in
four state employees use it today. Um,
and we're talking about note-taking and
brainstorming u meeting transcriptions
um very much in the kind of low-level
summarization um tasks which allows
folks just to you know achieve more with
less um and allow to use this tool and
have them learn by doing.
Next slide please.
As I was mentioning in terms of the the
governance and monitoring um we have
really set this up so we have you know
good governance and monitoring that we
can provide these types of dashboards to
IT leads across the state um and they
can think about AI enablement within
their agencies. Um so we can track
things such as the applications people
are using it um adoption things like
that. Um this has really been great in
terms of enterprise AI. Um and it
improves the security posture of the
state where we know things are not
leaving our trust boundaries.
Next slide please.
Just to speak to a a deep dive on a
couple of these things. Um various
different agencies can tell their own
story on this. Um but I'm going to speak
to a couple that I got their approval to
do so. Um the department of uh human
services CIO Dr. Dave Sloan um has been
an incredible champion um for us for AI
enablement within the state. Uh as he
arrived this year he he was very excited
to learn about the potential AI tools
that department of IT can offer him and
his workforce um and the things that he
can use it for. Just to give two
examples, um he him he him and his team
are using it as a research tool um to
help them with web discovery and
summarization and he's also thinking
about personalized learning paths. Um so
he has some very interesting AI
applications to share and um he said to
me that there will be lots more
interesting things to come soon as well.
Next slide please Sarah.
Another example I want to share is the
department of disabilities. Um the
department of disabilities um had an
application which they created here to
explore using Gemini to ensure documents
and websites are accessible.
This is an example of an internal
chatbot that they launched and rolled
out to some some of their colleagues to
test here um to do things such as check
that HTML code uh is accessible. And
this was something that has been been
made available from the department of IT
and really allows them to go slowly uh
and productively here to make sure to
check the answers are what they expect
and how to use it. The these are
examples where things that were just not
available to other agencies a year ago.
Next slide, please.
Okay, so I previously talked about what
I like to bucket is AI for general
productivity. I would say this is very
much raising the floor of agencies in
terms of AI learning. Now I want to talk
about some AI applications and this is
really really where we can raise the
ceiling in terms of what AI can help
with and how it can impact our
constituents.
This is not an exhaustive list. This is
a couple of applications that um folks
are willing to share at this moment and
I want to speak to some of the great
work that that AI is doing. You'll also
hear from other departments later today
as well who can speak about their use
cases more.
The first one I want to talk about is
the Sunbox chatbot. Um sorry previous
slide Sarah. Thanks. Uh this is an
example where uh Mer Maryland benefits
put together a chatbot on a website
which acts as a 247 customer service
tool. Um it allows folks to get their
FAQ questions answered and other
benefits questions um around the clock
in English and in Spanish. This they've
had 16,000 users since June. And they're
also thinking about this in a platform
specific approach. So this isn't just a
one-off chatbot. They are thinking of a
modular approach of how we can offer
chat bots to other agencies.
Next slide please.
Another example I want to share is
something that we did in the AI
enablement team. Um one reason I'd like
to think that Advisor Shaw and Secretary
Sa Savage hired me is that because
myself and our team can wear various
different hats. Uh, and this is one
example where we are not afraid to put
our our hands on keys and do a bit of
coding. I have a software engineer
background. In this specific example, we
were seeing intake tickets come in for
various different meeting transcription
tools. As you're aware, there is
probably a new meeting transcription
tool every week uh and have various
different functionalities. And we
realized that this is really an
opportunity to be a possible bu build
solution where we want to reduce IT
sprawl, reduce spend and increase the
state security posture um by using open
source tools to do stuff inhouse with
our existing existing technology. Um in
this case we helped folks with a a
notebook to do summarization of their
public meetings which are hosted on
YouTube. um agencies have thousands of
hours of public meetings on YouTube and
how do we make these meetings uh more
accessible and I think like this was a
great story where folks who had never
coded in their life before we were able
to provide them with this tool and it
was almost like you know hit a button
run and they were just amazed by you
know how useful and accurate it was.
Next slide please.
We have a project currently taking place
with the Maryland Department of
Environment and we have philanthropy
funding from the Rockefeller Foundation.
Maryland Department of Environment
currently has a kind of slow arduous
manual task of folks trying to find um
various different information acts or
understanding about pollution at various
different sites.
uh MDE wanted to understand if AI could
help them automate this process and
allow the public to to self-s serve. So
instead of these PIA requests taking
weeks, they could um be much shorter.
Okay, ne next slide.
An example of All right. Do you want me
to skip over these Sarah?
Sorry if you if you go back a bit if
you're happy for me to continue
speaking. Otherwise, if we are short on
time, I'm happy to pass it on.
>> I think you're good. Right. You go.
>> All right. If you can go back one more,
Sarah.
>> Thank you very much.
This example here is with uh the
Department of Environment with
philanthropy funding from Rockefeller
Foundation. What this philanthropy
company is trying to help the department
do is to use AI to help um summarize and
understand kind of existing PIA
requests, use natural language to find
um you know if I'm open up a new
business, I want to see if there was
pollution in the area beforehand. Can we
use AI to bubble up that information
that exists previously?
Okay, next slide, please.
Another application I want to talk about
which is being led by the Maryland
digital services is AI for plain
language. The state released an
executive order on plain language
initiatives uh last year and we are
aware that AI can help with plain
language if done responsibly. Um so this
is ensuring that no prompts are
responses are checked and the benefit or
the approach that the Maryland digital
service here was can we inject plain
language standards to AI and agency
specific content so that this isn't just
you know chat GPT or any kind of public
chatbot it's really refined to making
the changes where it needs to keeping
legal content the same and things like
that and the Maryland digital services
team is exploring rolling this out to
different agencies across a number of
different pilots.
Next slide, please.
The last example I'll talk about here is
the innovation by the innovation team
which sits in the governor's office. Um
this has been an incred credible team to
partner with and we're really happy to
see the approach that they are taking to
to explore or use AI in various
different projects that are very
important to the governance priorities.
One example I want to share with them is
they have been looking at using AI to
understand the needs of various
different communities across the across
the state. So this information is kind
of locked up in thousands of pages of
PDF in terms of what infrastructure is
in place or community services are in
place across the state. Um and also use
it to help them assess the the community
voice as well. Um what folks are saying
about different parts of their state. um
AI was a a perfect opportunity here
where they could analyze, you know,
almost 20,000 pages of PDF here and kind
of bring bring out common issues in
certain in certain areas um to identify
common needs.
All right, next slide.
Thank you very much and back to you,
Nishad.
>> All right, thank you Ray. Really
appreciate that. Um and as Ray
mentioned, you know, that's just a
smattering of use cases. We've supported
each of those in different ways from
governance to advice to technical
infrastructure. Um uh and now sort of
moving to this fourth pillar, you know,
this is really increasing the state's
AIQ and AIQ is our shorthand for
deepening the state's AI literacy, our
talent, our expertise, and the community
around this work. and our fantastic a
IML senior program manager Lauren Mafo
really leads on a lot of these efforts.
So Lauren, we might have to move a
little bit quickly through this, but uh
over to you.
>> Understood. Thanks, Nishant. Nice to
meet you all. Thank you for attending
this morning. I'm thrilled to share the
progress that we've made as an AI
enablement team on increasing the
state's AI IQ. What we mean by that is
we want to invest just as much in
upskilling and preparing our state civil
service for how they can responsibly and
productively integrate AI into their
respective workflows just as much as we
want to use AI responsibly and and
productively to improve service delivery
for Marylanders. You've heard several
examples from my colleagues about how we
are doing that, how we're partnering
with various agencies to bring AI into
workflows in a responsible productive
way that builds on the foundation we've
laid through the responsible AI policy
and the state roadmap. If you go to the
next slide, I will share some progress
that we've made on a particular effort
to upskill the state workforce and
that's the AI community of practice. I
spent a year as a product co-lead at the
Department of Labor in Maryland prior to
joining AI enablement. And I remember
when Nashant launched the AI community
of practice last summer as a shared
virtual space where anyone at any level
of state government in Maryland could
come to learn about AI. We had not
launched all of our major efforts at
that point. So at that time it was
really a space for pontification and
thinking about how AI can be integrated
in a practical way at scale. We
relaunched the community of practice in
June. That was the first thing on my
list when I joined the team around
Memorial Day and we took a demos not
memos ethos when we relaunched the
community of practice. We wanted it to
be a space that really shows what AI can
do in Maryland, not tell people. We
think a lot of the confusion around AI
relates to the rhetoric around it on
both an overly positive and overly
negative side. So we wanted to have
agencies across Maryland show their
peers how they are integrating it into
their workflows to work smarter and more
accurately. So we have been able to grow
our attendance at the coop by 300% in
three months. When we started in June,
we had a list of about 200 folks who had
joined the prior year. We're now closing
in on 700 people who are on our list.
And we typically have an attendance rate
of between 33 and 50% which for an
optional meeting is quite high. Our
average attendance is about 150 to 200
uh state civil servants per month. So we
are actively engaging folks and using
the community of practice not just as a
shared space to provide updates on what
AI enablement is working on but more
importantly to show people the art of
the possible when it comes to
integrating AI into their respective
workflows to work more responsibly and
productively.
If we go to the next slide, we will talk
a little bit more about the AI
internship program that Maryland hosted
in the summer of 25. The partnership for
a public service was able to provide the
state 17 interns who worked on AI
projects at a range of agencies over the
summer. We were able to redirect those
interns from federal internships which
did not materialize. We brought them
into Maryland to help work handinhand
with respective agencies and they had an
incredible impact in their short time
with us. You saw earlier that that Rey
shared what MDOT is doing related to
using Notebook LM as a tool to scale
accessibility standards. An intern had a
very strong role in that. Another
example I love is that we had one intern
who is an English major create a noode
chatbot meant to triage public comments
at her agency. It was so successful that
her agency is now talking about
procuring a sandbox environment where
they can deploy that chatbot for wider
use across the agency. So those are two
of 17 successful use cases that we had
with our interns and we do plan on
growing that program moving forward. Uh
because our interns are just as strong
teachers as they are people to be taught
by us. And if you go to the next slide,
uh we also were able to secure funding
from the Hoffman Foundation to have two
fellows through the Federation of
American Scientists join us at the state
fairly soon. Our team in particular won
funding to hire an AI ML engineering
director for a two-year fellowship. They
are going to add technical expertise to
our already uh in-house team of experts
and they will also work very closely
with the Department of Labor in Maryland
to help prepare the state's workforce
against any disruptions that AI might
bring. We are also partnering with labor
right now to host short-term AI fellows
that can advise us on a statewide AI
literacy and training program. One of
the big items on my agenda in this final
quarter of the year is to come up with a
strategy to train the state workforce at
scale beyond the community of practice.
And we are actively talking with labor
as well as FAS to come up with a plan to
get short-term fellows in the door as
soon as possible so they can start
advising us on best practices for that
effort.
If we go to the next uh slide, the last
thing I'll talk about is our office
hours. AI enablement launched office
hours every Monday starting in June. Uh
we have since held 50 office hours with
various state agencies and peers from
those agencies who they can come and
book any time with us to ask any
questions related to AI implementation,
procurement, what they can and cannot do
with AI. So we are available every week
as that ongoing resource. Anyone can
book time with us and I'm happy to
provide that link later if helpful. We
also provide free trainings uh that are
given via innovate us async
asynchronously via workday. So these
courses are free to complete and state
staff can complete them on their own
time if they want to upskill on their
own time. We have also offered bespoke
trainings for agencies like commerce,
Maryland public television and other
agencies upon their request. So when
they want to train their staff on a
particular AI use case, they will come
to us and we will provide bespoke AI
training for their particular cases. And
as mentioned before, we are actively
partnering with labor as well as DBM on
a statewide training strategy which I
hope to have updates for you on within
the next few months.
And with that I will turn it over to
Nashad.
>> Appreciate it. Um so this last pillar is
really based on an ask from SB818 a set
of studies and it doesn't
different domains. These are healthcare
public safety other domains. And the
goal noted in the road map um that we
published earlier this year is to share
the study outputs in December. And those
outputs will depend on the findings um
but they could be reports, prioritize
recommendations, pilot initiatives or
work streams. Uh next slide Sarah. Now
each one of these deep dives is led by
the agency or entity with the most
relevancy to it. So for example,
commerce is leading um the AI and
economic development deep dive. the
state board of elections leads AI and
elections, DGS leads AI procurement and
so on and so forth. Um, so while the AI
enablement team isn't the sort of the
best place to give an update on each one
of those, particularly as they're still
ongoing, we did think it would be really
helpful uh to briefly discuss one as an
example. So uh you know labor has been
leading on a report on AI in the
workforce both the state workforce at
large and the state government workforce
and that includes a literature review
data analysis interviews with academics
and think tanks and frontier labs and
businesses uh civil society labor and
others. Um and that report will include
an analysis on the AI readiness of our
workforce on opportunities and skills
analysis and a set of recommendations
and actions to take. And so the idea
there is to use that type of analysis um
to essentially spur action and not just
be another report. Uh so for example,
our state government AI literacy efforts
which Lauren um alluded to prior uh you
know they'll work backwards from the
recommendations that that come from from
this report. Next slide.
So I hope that gives a really good
highlevel sense of how the AI enablement
team with partners across DIT and the
state are pushing forward adoption. We
don't yet have a formal strategy for
2026. We're still focused on executing
our ask for 2025, but I did want to end
on what I think we're likely to see in
2026 and be beyond. Um I think we'll see
the state move up our maturity curve. So
from pure foundation building in 2024 to
momentum building in 2025 to focusing
really on enterprise adoption and use in
2026 and beyond. And I like to
characterize that as us moving from zero
to one. I think we're just reaching the
one stage now and really entering the 1
to 10 phase. I think we'll see more
clarity on the pathways that agencies
have to go from idea to experimentation
to adoption and that includes centrally
managed AI tooling and infrastructure.
Um the types of users and use cases
they're best suited for as well as uh
external partners that can help with
those efforts. I think we'll see an
expansion of our existing AI literacy
efforts to be much more robust offerings
that power different types of learners
journeys across different role types.
And we'll start seeing expertise and AI
leadership move beyond a few pockets
across the state to being more deeply
embedded across agencies really as a as
a result of those literacy initiatives,
incoming new hires, uh, and an emerging
understanding that this is really a
crucial area to develop capabilities in
not just to do it but across agencies.
Um, and as that happens, I think we'll
see the AI enablement team really
evolving to give guidance on the
frontier and incubate approaches uh to
new risks and challenges.
So, with that, um, I'm not sure how much
time we have left, but would love to
open it up to Q&A.
>> Thank you very much, Nishant. You always
do such a great job pulling everything
together for us. Um, just in terms of
timeline, um, and maybe we could stop
sharing the screen for a second so I can
see people's hands when they go up. Um,
we'd like to ex extend this part. We're
running a bit over, but we'd like to go
to, um, 11:15 to allow our members to
ask some questions. What that means for
the next panel of state agencies is
we're going to ask you to be as speedy
as possible, like trying to keep your
presentation to seven or eight minutes
so that we can get through everything um
in time. Um and so with that logistical
announcement, um I'm going to call on
delegate Ken Kerr for the first
question.
>> Thank you, Madam Chair. Um Secretary,
thank you and your team for this uh
update. Uh my question has something to
do with the but Solomon mentioned
transcription AI transcription in his
presentation. I was recently at an NCSO
uh seminar about healthcare where they
they talked about the problem that
they've been encountering in a health
care setting with AI transcription of
medical records is that there's not an
ability to audit in some cases that the
the original recordings that are
uploaded to the to the vendor server
become the property of the vendor and
the the health care provider can't get
access to them in order to go back and
run an audit to see about the accuracy
of the transcription. Have you
encountered any of that or is that part
of your advice to agencies that are
seeking to use transcription uh through
AI?
>> Yeah. So, thanks for the question uh
delegate curve. So, in our governance or
AI card, we actually provided two types
of guidance against that. So, I want to
answer your first question directly. The
Gemini tool when it does transcriptions
those transcripts are available to us in
our enterprise environment. So if we
were transcribing let's say this call
for example we could see the entire
transcript at the end of it if we had to
edit it review it uh and so forth. And
in our guidance to agencies we do you
know recommend that they take a look at
that because you know people can have
different accents and so forth. So being
able to kind of speak uh and review
those is accessible to everybody. So
just answering that kind of explicit
question. Um the second thing is that in
the actual guidance agencies, we do also
tell them around like different things
they should and shouldn't do in those
recordings. Um especially when it comes
to recording like private information
and so forth, but we haven't really, I
guess I would say, internally ran into a
challenge of being able to access our
own transcripts uh from an AI
transcription software like Gemini. So I
hope that answers that.
the uh the problem was being able to
access the original recordings in order
to compare them to the transcript.
>> Yes. So if when someone does a recording
on Gemini, they are recording the audio,
they can compare both the audio and the
text transcript from the recording. So
those both come out of the Gemini
recording.
>> Okay. Thank you, Solomon.
Any other questions?
If not, I have a couple. Um I mean I am
I'm just really like thrilled with how
much progress has been made. Um I can't
remember who was presenting the the bit
about the intake process. But um my
question was of the 100 plus use cases
that we've identified how many are
actually moving forward and what can the
state do to help them move forward
faster?
>> Yes. So thanks for requesting Senator
Esther. Uh so I'll answer your first
question which is of the 100 use cases
how many are moving forward? Uh so I
want to be clear actually those 100 use
cases are the ones that are moving
forward. So I didn't include ones. We
have ones that literally a few hours
after this call we have a weekly review
of AI use cases and those are always
being reviewed. The hundred cases that
are available are ones that we know
agencies are actively working on to move
across the finish line and then we're
actively as a team helping them do that.
Um so that's kind of addressing your
first question. So I hope that answers
that.
>> It answers this. Yeah, it does. Um, I
mean I guess the other part was like I
mean are you are you able to move
forward all of the use cases that you
feel have a high return on investment
and actually like are you like how is it
happening? Like are these use cases
moving ahead for free? Are we funding
them? Like I'm just trying to because I
know that we can save money by doing
things more efficiently and I'm trying
to figure out what our investment is and
what the return on the investment is.
>> Yes. Yes, I'm going to answer part of
that and I'll turn over to Nishan can
talk to us more broadly across all these
use cases. So for our use cases that
we're moving forward, some of them are
using let's say Gemini that's enterprise
solution state already has some have
procured some solutions at the agency
level. So the example I like to give is
there's an agency is using uh AI for
like Dplotting to help like review and
like translate that into images using
AI. That's a really cool uh use case of
an AI technology. And so a lot of those
cases have been able to move forward
either because we have a solution in
place or it's an agency going to procure
something. And so we're really helping
them review and evaluate is this the
appropriate AI use case? You know, do
they have all the, you know, responsible
AI use case policies in place to use
that? Do they have the data and privacy
uh necessary to set that up? But I will
turn it over to Nishant to talk a little
bit more around kind of the financial
aspects and uh material support that
might be needed for some future
projects.
>> Thank you. Thank you very much.
>> Yeah, absolutely. Thanks, Selman. Um, so
I think I I referred to previously
Senator Hester this concept of like
finding different pathways to move from
idea to experiment to scale and each of
those requires sort of different types
of engagements. What we want agencies to
understand is what is an AI shaped
problem? Not just the fact that you want
a chatbot for your site, but what is the
problem you're trying to solve? And then
is AI the right thing to do that? Um,
often it's not. You could just have good
website content and that sort of solves
the problem. Um but for ones where AI is
really helpful um ideally we have like a
workshop or a playbook or a productivity
guide or some set of material that
answers questions to say okay what is
the art of the possible in that program
area that we you have and so we've built
this productivity guide that helps some
agencies answer that set of questions um
we want to partner with external uh
folks so this um this set of
conversations with UMD and then there's
a number of other conversations ations
with other um partners as well where
they are external experts in different
spaces that can help power some of those
exploratory sort of discovery
conversations. Um what we often find is
that our existing tools so Gemini is not
just the you know the set of like the
chatbot within Google workspace there's
also notebook LM there's Google AI
studio there's all these things you can
do with that and we've often found that
just sort of spending some time with the
agency to like double click into their
problem and say hey we can actually
leverage these tools to run a prototype
um for what you're trying to see and see
if AI is the right solution there that I
would say like a good percentage of the
use cases we've been successful in just
applying existing tools to those given
problem statements. Um the sort of third
approach here is that you know once you
sort of move from that idea to the proof
of concept then you need to scale a
solution into production. Um and that's
a very different thing that is more
expensive that requires the right type
of data that requires and a handful of
agencies have done that type of work
effectively and often a formal
procurement is the right you know um
approach there. Um and the key there is
to have the right legal language, the
right sort of governance requirements to
help empower that agency to go from an
understanding of okay here's the problem
we want to get but also to what are the
evaluations how are we actually looking
at the set of solutions so that it's not
really snake oil this is like in fact a
thing that will solve this for us. So
there's that work that's happening sort
of around procurement and then the last
element of this is expanding the tech
stack that powers from that idea to
proof of concept to um scaling stage and
that's work that we're running right now
which is essentially to say that um okay
if we let's assume that we have
different persona types um leveraging AI
in the state you have power users who
are like developing AI you have the
general productivity users you have
different role types and for each one of
those what is the tech stack, you know,
like what is the tool you should use
when you're just testing and what is the
tool that you should use in a sandbox to
sort of um you know, see the art of the
possible and then how do you actually
scale that and that might be you know a
Google environment, it might be
Microsoft, it might be AWS um it might
be sort of an open source approach but
the work that we're doing right now will
bring much more clarity to exactly what
that pathway looks like and how do it
should be centrally managing or not
centrally managing um that set of
infrastructure.
Okay. I think that that sounds really
like resourceful. Um I guess from the
from the kind of procurement
portion of the whole thing, I'm
wondering if we need a new vehicle like
for these AI enablement projects that
you want to move from pilot to scale. Do
they wait for a year to become an MITDP
or is there a way that you could use
like the expedited fund like within
within that to move forward or agencies
using their existing money? And the
reason I'm asking is because I'd like to
be able to help enable this process um
going forward if indeed you need
something different from the state
legislature.
I am not as familiar with the expedited
fund. So there's a whole lot I can say
to that. I don't know if Secretary
Savage uh knows more about that. Um but
>> yeah, I can I can speak to that. Sorry,
I was trying to find the the mute. Um so
we confirmed um with DLS that the 2025
BERA repealed the 20% requirement for
expedited projects. Um, so while funding
for the expedited projects will be
budgeted under ITAF, the 20% requirement
for expedited projects is no longer
applicable. Um, so that is not a
resource that's available to us.
>> So wait, it it's not it's not mandated
anymore. That doesn't mean you guys
couldn't ask for it if if we if if that
was indeed a tool that we needed. So I I
guess my question more broadly is and we
can take it offline is is there do we
have the tools we need in terms of
finance and procurement to enable the
legitimate projects that need to move
forward to go to go on? Like I noticed
that the the PIA that won with MDE is
done through the Rockefeller grant. So
obviously there's there's a need there
that we found philanthropic dollars for.
Um but is that like s sustainable I
guess? Um
>> yeah I think there's there's two two
things I want to call out and one as you
noted some projects need an incubation
stage and we have been successful so far
for you proofs of concept in finding
philanthropic dollars or partnerships
um with um with universities and others
to you know sort of initially pilot
something. I don't think we need
something separate for it to like turn
into an MITP. I mean, I think the the
goal really should be that AI, you know,
advanced technology is the foundation of
an MITP. So, I don't see them as
distinct things. Um, and my hope is
actually that, um, you know, instead of
the bespoke systems that the state has
been building, you know, for decades,
we're using AI to, you know, not just,
um, to replace some of the technology
that we would implement, um, either
directly. So, uh, you know, it's the the
licensing, uh, permit that, uh,
licensing and permitting pilot that Ray
mentioned, for example, um, rather than
spend, you know, x amount of dollars
trying to build an end licensing
permitting system, we're seeing that AI
can sort of, um, obiate the need for
doing that. So, one, you I'm sort of
hoping that um, it replaces some of
these major, you know, some of the
MITDPs, period, um, or it's a component
of it. So, you know, Pat Mclofflin,
who's the executive director of Maryland
Benefits, and I have talked a lot about
um the ability to, you know, leverage
some of the some of the models for
generating software code, for example.
Um so, again, that's sort of shrink the
the footprint um of an MITDP. So, I I
see the technology as embedded in the
MITPS. So, I don't think we need to add
anything with regard to that. I think
they're they're you know to the earlier
point of um could we always rely on you
know phil philanthropy and universities
for some of the upfront seed funding to
pilot things. Um the state is obviously
cash poor. So it feels like it would be
challenging to ask you for additional
funding to support that. Um but
something that would like an innovation
fund for example something like that
could be could be interesting to seed
some of those upfront um ideas.
>> Yeah know thank you for that. Um and for
those of you who are watching I mean the
point of the expedited fund which exists
but doesn't have any money in it
currently was to enable us to move
forward with smaller projects in between
the budget cycle. So, I mean, I would
hate for our agencies to have to wait,
you know, a full year to get approved
from MI MITDP, especially if it's not
like that much money. We I think we just
need a vehicle um you know, by which you
guys can continue to, you know,
modernize the uh the way that the the
state works. Um so, we are um about at
time. I just wanted to to flag one thing
which maybe we can take offline. Um, I
appreciated Nashant you're adding the um
the the bit about the AI enablement
roadmap and I heard you mention that
we'd hopefully be getting an update in
in December. Um, I don't think there's
anything legislatively about you about a
formal report. Um, but definitely we
would appreciate, you know, knowing
where where we're going, you know, in
just an update from each team lead would
be fabulous if we can get that before
the session starts.
Um
>> happy to do that.
>> Very thank you so much. Um okay, not
seeing any other questions. Let's move
on to our next section. Um we really
appreciate uh the other folks who are
here. Um
so I'll just uh
I think we are going to be joined. I see
people coming and going. Um but the next
bit um is just a deeper dive on some of
our specific applications um from across
our state agencies. The ones who are
really leading the way we've asked um
from the department of budget management
we have Neil Desai the chief human
resource officer and Derek Rost the
chief information officer will be giving
us um an update. Then we have the
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange uh
Venant uh Kashiman the chief information
officer and finally from the department
of service and civic innovation we have
Isaac Frumpkin the chie ch ch ch ch ch
ch ch ch ch ch ch ch ch ch ch ch ch ch
ch ch ch ch ch ch ch ch chief
information officer again. So um once
again uh we really appreciate you all
being um as speedy as you can to help us
catch up a little bit on time, but
really appreciate you being here and
look forward to what you have to say.
And so with that, I'll turn it over to
whoever is leading from DBM.
>> Great. I'll go ahead and kick things off
then. Uh Dana, appreciate you sharing
the slides. Hi uh Neil Desai, uh chief
HR officer as you mentioned. Uh really
appreciate the opportunity to present.
Very much looking forward to uh
continuing to engage uh on this and and
many other topics um as we go along. Um
uh in light of your uh the logistical
constraints, I'll move uh sort of
quickly through this. Um Dana, if we can
of move on to the next slide. Um I would
say DBM is um really at the beginning of
our AI adoption um journey. We are
beginning to roll out a few use cases
and become more familiar with those
systems while also evaluating potential
applications, understanding how they
would work, how they would add value,
how we can make them uh effective for
the you know the use cases that we've
got in the in these early stages. We are
identifying a few sort of potential
focus areas. Things that we are sort of
looking for as we look for places to
roll um this out and to try uh initial
use cases. things that have significant
manual review um of data things that are
you know where we can optimize very time
inensive or highly manual processes
uh obviously we are uh focus very
focused on the sensitivities uh
particularly in my shop uh around AI and
HR um and understanding that we you know
for anything that we would be doing that
you know took a larger more
decision-making role uh would be
obviously have to be very rigorously
tested have to understand the potential
bias and implications that it would
have. Our focus at the moment is really
on enhancing human judgment, not on
replacing it. Um, we're also looking
very actively at uh AI tools that
vendors are incorporating into various
tools that we have uh already in place
and seeing how we can leverage or use
those, how they can be effective for us,
how they can help save us time, um, and
uh, whether they're sort of, you know,
uh, worth the investment that they that
they have. Um again in interest of quick
moving quickly I'll let's jump to the
next slide if we could and would love to
talk about a few of the use cases that
we've uh rolled out to date or are
looking to roll out in the near uh
future.
Uh so starting on the left here we have
an internal chatbot in our employee
benefits division. Um this was deployed
last week after completing accuracy
testing uh on it. This is really a tool
designed for the employee benefits
specialists themselves. It's not sort of
public facing. It is internal facing.
And uh the benefits guides, as you may
know, are sort of very large, dense
documents with a ton of very detailed
information covering lots of different
scenarios. They are sort of slow and
hard to work through. As employee
benefit specialists are responding to
questions from the public um and from
employees, we um have deployed this
chatbot to allow them to sort of type in
quickly uh get to the question that is
being asked, pull up using this AI
chatbot the tools and places that we
would have in the benefits guide that
are relevant for the question that have
been going or that you know are adjacent
to it and so may be relevant.
This really helps accelerate and uh
improve the quality of the call that
they're having and so we can process
more applica uh sort of more questions
more incoming faster. We can give better
service uh for those that that are
there. We've also deployed in a number
of places to um accelerate existing or
sort of manual processes. So this first
bullet in the middle here uh we've used
Gemini to develop noode scripts um to
process different benefit reports. No.
So in the benefits world there's often
you know you're pulling data from
multiple places and you have these are
sort of big dense reports and they have
to be the data has to be cleaned and it
has to be matched across different data
sets and again that that merge has got
to be uh be cleaned. These are often
very sort of line by line manual uh
things in order to check accuracy and
ensure that we're doing it right. By
developing these scripts we're able to
do this much much more uh quickly. we
were able to accelerate and automate a
lot of that matching and that checking.
So those have really accelerated the the
development of those of those processes.
Um we've also added uh uh AI to
synthesize free text inputs in a few
places particularly around our refund
log um where we are you know have a lot
of free text information that has to be
incorporated and structured that
historically has been a very again you
know a member of my team will go through
and read them and summarize and sort of
pull that information together in a
structured way. um we can now do that
with um with AI with the member of my
team just sort of checking and
validating as opposed to having to do it
from scratch. Um we're also looking in
the classification space. Um our
classification process is a you know a
very involved manual process where we
will review lots of information about a
particular job. a lot of the job duties
that are being proposed, where that
would fit, comparable information, um
historical trends and sort of what we've
done in the past for these positions,
how it fits into the larger structure of
the classification system that we have.
We are actively exploring um AI tools
that would allow us to uh optimize in a
bunch of different ways sort of both in
simplifying the rewriting of uh class
specs particularly aligned to the
educational level that is required by
that particular job. So making sure that
we're not writing the spec at a higher
level than is required for the job that
we would uh we would be requiring. Um
there are sort of I think there are
roughly 3,500 job classifications in in
Maryland. And so you know being able to
do this more rapidly, more effectively
is a real time saver for us. In
addition, by building linkages to
identifying, hey, what are the other
skills and other jobs that we have both
horizontally and vertically, we can do a
better job of designing career pathways,
>> finding uh places where there may be
more classifications than we actually
need. We can consolidate those down. um
and then putting all of that together
into a uh into a much more rapid process
to um to to update those classifications
and improve them. So, a thing that we
are still exploring but are very excited
about moving forward with. Um we also
have vendors deploying AI in some cases.
Those are things that are really
helpful. Um we have a new employee uh
relations database that sort of
centralizes all of the employee
relations issues and settlement
conferences and and cases that come up.
Um right now that is a very manual
process. It's been you know things will
get emailed into us. We will have to
process it individually. Then uh open a
case in a very antiquated system
summarize all of that information into
you know a set of documents that we can
then make decisions on and then close
that out elevate it up if if that's
needed.
The new employee relations databate that
we are deploying uh over the next couple
of months will incorporate AI into this
where they can just take the raw inputs
and develop open a new case, deploy the
summary information and have the the
sort of information available so that my
team can just take a look at it
immediately have the relevant
information and begin to process the
sort of substantive hard judgmentbased
work uh that they do in in settlement
conferences and managing employee
relations issues. um in some places, not
here on the slide, but in some places
the AI tools that we've uh we've seen
deployed haven't been that much of a
value ad or they're still in their
infancy. And so we're still we're doing
that. Um there's lots of places that is
I won't again with interest of time, I
won't go through each of those, but for
each of these places, we are kind of
taking a look and understanding if it's
a a tool that we can we can actually use
and would like to invest in. We're also
investing in training. So uh kind of
matching the classification work that we
are thinking about we've started to
invest in fundamental training for our
classification team. So 65% of the team
has been trained on those found
fundamentals learning modules that'll
continue. Um in addition uh Nishant
already mentioned uh that we are
partnering with the Department of Labor
to uh develop recommendations for state
workforce AI upskilling and so expect
those to come out over the next few few
months there. Uh the next slide is just
some sort of potential use cases for the
longer term. I think there's a lot of
places that this could be really
exciting. Um I mean accelerating and
improved hiring uh minimum
qualifications checks take a long uh a
significant amount of staff time to do
currently and having a first pass of
that done by AA could be a very
interesting use case. Um obviously also
there's a lot of work going on in the
private sector around automated matching
of skills to opportunities. Um that's
also a thing we're looking at for all of
these as we get into sort of core hiring
recruiting processes all of that. We're
going to have to be very careful about
the potential for implicating bias. Even
some of the, you know, largest private
sector companies as they have rolled
this out. Um, it turns out that a lot of
the training data and a lot of the way
that decisions have been made previously
are have in sort of implicit bias. We
want to make sure that obviously that
doesn't come into the state's hiring
process in any way, shape or form. Um,
also opportunities in streamlining
citizen services with AI chatbots.
Obviously starting in on that with the
benefits guide um the internal facing
benefits guide uh support for uh
employee benefits and then enhanced
information discovery around uh DBM's
website once we get into the website
there's obviously lots of other ways in
which we can uh deploy that uh
internally and externally
I will pause there uh and don't know if
we'll do questions now or pass on to the
next presenter
I see a a question from Senator Cheryl
Kagan.
>> Thank you, Senator Hester. Madam Chair,
appreciate it. Uh Neil, that last slide
was especially meaningful to me as I
continue to work um with DIT and others
on uh on creating the opportunity for
Maryland to be the very first state in
the country to have a statewide 311
system. Just wanted to uh talk about
just two quick things. One is I'm going
to caution if this goes any more broadly
or if that slide is reused. I just want
to suggest that the word citizen is is a
charged word right now and we don't only
serve citizens, we also serve tourists,
visitors, businesses, nonprofits and all
that. So I just want to suggest that
that word might be tweaked in the future
or frankly eliminated. Um and then
second, I wonder if you can talk a
little bit about the first pass of um
hiring because there are some people uh
who question whether it's a person with
disabilities, whether it's um whether
it's cultural differences or something
that AI is still challenging and pro
problematic. there are some there was
some conversation about doing a first
pass on prospective 911 specialists and
uh and that it really couldn't discern
who would be effective in that role.
Would love to hear your thoughts. Thank
you again, Madam Chair.
>> I really appreciate the questions. I
think they're great. Absolutely. Uh very
good catch on the on the wording there.
We will absolutely update. Appreciate
the flag on that. um for bringing AI
into the selection process I think is
something that we want to be very sort
of deliberate about if we want to go
down that path. I think there's still a
lot of benefit and value in having
humans um you know be doing doing the
review in that place in particular.
There have been both you know
historically in the early days and even
quite recently um a number of notable
examples in the private sector where
yeah that you know there was there were
real problems associated with this even
in very large I'm not you know there's
several examples even in large sort of
techsavvy you know very you know
internet AI uh IT forward industries
where there were there were real
difficulties with this
>> as as I sort look at the landscape of
hiring. I think there are a bunch of
places that we could look at to start AI
adoption that would be a little bit more
sort of potentially amendable or less
risky um to this. I think doing things
that are first passes at some of I was
mentioning that the the um the
qualifications the minimum
qualifications
right now you know you get a big set of
uh application documents resumeums
supporting documentation etc that
highlight that we have to we are sort of
now manually matching that against the
minimum qualifications of that job to
make sure that they meet those
thresholds. In many cases they do and
it's a very straightforward thing to say
you know you need four years you've got
these particular things you know you
find the spot on their resume that says
they got four years great. Being able to
do that as a first pass quick hit say
hey look this is you know this person in
this part of their resume has it
>> would be a real accelerator to a to a
human-based review of those um of those
qualifications and could be a you know
there's still a human in the loop. It's
still the human that is ultimately
making the decision.
>> Sure. on that that I think would be kind
of earlier places we'd want to look.
>> Yes. I just think we ought to So, thank
you for your thoughtful answer and uh uh
I think it's, you know, yellow light and
and cautionary. Uh so, thank you for
that. And uh Senator Hester, I see that
Laura Dunwy is in the room and so I'm
really delighted that you were um able
to recruit her to join us. So, I'm
looking forward to as always learning
from her. Thank you. I'll go back on
mute.
>> Thank you very much, Senator Kagan. I
appreciate your leadership in this area.
911, 311211, all of them. Um, I see that
Delegate Hill has her hand up.
>> Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you,
Mr. Cipher, um, the presentation, and I
apologize. I had to step out for some of
the um earlier presentation. So, if I
ask a question that is redundant, please
say, you know, that was addressed
earlier. and when I review um the part
of the meeting that I missed, you know,
I'll do that so we don't have to answer
that. So, um real quick question based
on your answer to uh Senator Kagan's
last question. When you talk about
wanting to ensure that there's a human
making a decision at the end, um
particularly with human resources and
etc. Um in some cases what that means is
the human follows you know they see what
the algorithm or the AI recommended and
they say yeah that's consistent with our
policy and then they you know rubber
stamp it. In other cases, they actually
do a review of all the um independent
information that was fed into the
algorithm and therefore make a
independent decision which allows for
catching errors um in the AI processing.
So when you talk about a humanm
decision, which um process are you
thinking of um or is there a third way
that you lean that?
>> It's a great question and I think a a
good insight into how these things
actually get rolled out and and used. Um
and I I think definitely the interest is
I think particularly in HR which I think
is a particularly sensitive uh area and
has a you know honestly has a somewhat
checkered uh history with this. Um I
think we would definitely want to uh
ensure that you know we were having
humans review understand you know be
able to fully stand by the decision that
is being made sort of soup to nuts. Um
when I just as a very sort of blunt
huristic, I think about this as um
AI to use in automating or sort of
accelerating a task uh completion versus
AI in the use of in using to make
decisions um in various ways. And I
think we'll definitely want to start
with, you know, how can we automate or
accelerate tasks that are being done.
Um, and as we sort of very
clearly understand as we move into
anything that sort of smacks more of
decision- making, um, exactly to your
point, I mean, we really have to be
extremely confident, soup to nuts, um,
that we understand and can stand by any
decision that's made.
>> May I ask another question, Madam Chair?
Just one.
>> Yes. as long as the question and the
answer are both quick,
>> right? So, um is there any information
about um that you can share with us
either, you know, send us something um
about what are the how do you vet for
bias in your systems as you're
implementing these systems particularly
ones that we're getting through outside
vendors and how do you correct for
errors in the information. So in the
case you talk about where staff are are
using the system to give answers,
how are we catching errors and then
feeding that back into to um to the
system so that they improve?
Yeah, let if it's if it's okay with you,
I'll I'd say let's that's a potentially
a longer and more detailed answer to
sort of think uh carefully about the the
I can give you more detail on the
accuracy testing that we did for our uh
sort of the chatbot that we're using at
U employee benefits. Um but in the
interest of time, if it's okay with you,
I can follow up uh offline or backward.
Yeah,
>> perfect. Thank you.
Thank thank you very much. I appreciate
both the question and um the answer to
take it offline. I think um in general
if members have questions just send them
to the joint committee staff and we'll
follow up with everybody. Um in fact uh
uh doc uh Mr. Desai I mean I actually
wanted to ask you what you needed in
order to allow you to move forward with
those future ideas. So we'll include
that in the list of questions going
forward. So thank you so much for your
remarks. really appreciate the good work
of DBM. We'll now move on to the
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange. I
think we're joined uh by by Vanc Koshan
are the CE CIO for um the Health Benefit
Exchange. I understand you're doing
great work and look forward to hearing
from you. Over to you.
>> Thank you, Senator. Thank you, Delasa. I
hope you can see the screen and you can
hear me also. I'll uh try to rush ethics
in five 10 minutes in maximum poss. I
know it's not a great idea where the
country is standing right now but I'll
try my best but thank you so much. Uh I
know we this uh uh panel understands
what is ethical intelligence why it's
important so I won't dwell on it. Uh but
I just want us to consider um uh just
for to set the levels at the ground
here. uh AI logic uh history shows I
know some of these studies are dated but
history shows um 80% of black mortgage
application can be denied just like that
because of AI logic that had a bias in
us uh from our biases and how do we
control I think that kind of question uh
delegate h was asking about in a
different way and it can even go beyond
that uh predicting a black defendant in
a court of justice is uh how uh what
what what are they prone to do even more
down the line. I mean when you think of
these things and uh where I work in
healthcare setting uh you can imagine uh
the type of kind of damage that can
cause a can cause uh to the public in
terms of not having uh capacity in the
logic can impact the privacy and
security um impact the equitable
delivery of services and erode the
public trust and we all know that uh uh
these systems uh can perpetuate bias
discriminate, violate privacy and whatn
not. So why do we even use it in the
first place? Uh when this is built on a
vicious cycle. Um but for the health
exchanges
uh there is a compelling need uh that
exists for integrating ethical standards
when adopting AI. So I I'll focus my
today's very quick presentation on
ethics and how we uh integrate into our
framework and what are the couple of use
cases. I'll be very brief. So some of
these things we know it uh why
government is different, government a is
different. So I won't dwell on it. Uh
but let's uh get into some ideas here.
Uh if as an implementtor if you
integrate
uh your core organizational framework
with core ethical principles like
transparency, justice and fairness,
non-malis and security, privacy,
accountability, responsibility etc. If
you can get a framework and if your
regulations are around that thankfully
uh you know Maryland is doing seen
recently California has done it unlike
uh European Union has a act for AI
unfortunately we don't have for us but
uh we have pockets of strengths how can
we integrate these and we do it has done
phenomenal work in the last two years so
if we how how we can integrate these
into our actual implementation practices
there are some examples here I would be
very happy to uh explain in detail some
of these based on my research as well as
others research. Uh I'll be very happy
to see how we can show how we can
translate when implementing systems in
technology in Maryland. So I'll be very
happy to do so down the line. Uh but if
taking a simple example of data
governance for instance uh if you have a
robust data governance and you do your
audit and compliance implement best
practices have your consent protocols uh
and security take care of security
technology and training that was talked
a lot today. uh you can see how this can
impact certain ethical principle and how
it can alleviate certain concerns and
our outcome could be uh in the way that
we want to be uh unethical and
safeguarding the privacy etc. Uh this is
just a simple example when we think of
AI as a whole. Research shows these are
just eight of these categories but there
can be more. uh you can combine them
into four different areas data
technology policy and governance and
your organizational factors and and if
you target each of these for instance uh
each of these for example if you target
as noted here uh there these are some of
the actionable items uh that the
agencies can take and implement directly
um for I'll just focus on number three
under organization promote diversity and
inclusion in AI development how does it
even impact I know diversity is not a
popular word right now but uh if we have
that in your AI development AI
implementation you can research source
you can significantly improve
eliminating these biases for example
this is just one example there are many
such examples uh across these domains.
So coming to uh Maryland health
connections use cases. So what we have
done over the years uh we had
implemented a chatbot AI powered chatbot
a couple of years back we're a little
ahead of the curve there and in 2024 we
have handled more than 600,000 consumer
queries directly and this year I
understand from my team this morning we
have handled 1.3 million consumer
queries in 2025 alone even before the
open enrollment which is a very critical
period for us between November and
January this year next year January. So
if I if I look at it that's 1.5 million
consumer queries uh directly handled by
this bot which directly saved
significant amount cost for the state.
Even if I am saying 20% of these 10 to
20% let's say 20 10 to 20% of these
chats try uh avoided the calls to call
center that's more than $2 million cost
saving and that's also that also means
the call center staff and workers can
focus on more complex cases and help the
consumers and getting Medicaid quality
help and coverage. So it's a very
significant benefit here and we have uh
implemented an AI agent supported call
center when consumers call the call
center for technical help like resetting
a password for example. Uh we have seen
more than 35% of our consumers calls are
automatically handled. Again this is a
very significant cost-saving initiative
but also it extends the consumer support
to 24 hours a day as opposed to 6 hours
or 8 hours call center timeline. So it's
a very significant benefit and also it
brings a lot of equity in uh responding
to consumers queries. It's it's kind of
technology neutral for the consumer.
It's a lot easier for consumers to talk
to these agents. So we have we are
expanding this capability this year and
end of this year um to provide consumers
more status case status and other
information directly through AI
integrations. And I want to say
highlight one other uh significant uh
initiative we had couple of years back
and we are expanding and adding more uh
automated technologies here. Uh we are
verifying almost 125,000 plus consumer
documents uh consumer asking for
Medicaid coverage. This is a you may
wonder 125,000 may be a small number but
if you connect to the number of families
number of consumers number of people in
Marylanders who get benefited it's
almost 600,000 Marylanders get benefited
because of this one functionality what
it means is when consumers submit a
document for Medicaid coverage we are
able to do realtime determination right
there as opposed to sending these
documents to workers skew and workers
looking into it maybe taking a few days
of time before confirming a
determination for Medicaid. These are
some simp examples that directly
translate not only saving cost for the
state but also providing real benefit to
consumers who are in need and we are
expanding beyond this obviously and
there are some ideas we have planned for
later part of this year as well as next
year. I'll be very happy to share them
with this panel sometime in the future
if interested. And uh in terms of AI
policy pillars uh we uh we we rely on
these uh in terms of having an ethical
commitment and aligning our AI with our
state regulation for regulation if any
and also any other best practices that
we seek and having a robust governance
framework in terms of our technology
development implementation and also we
continuously monitor and improve over
time. So bringing the pillars to
practice uh there are many examples here
how these can be built uh into our
technology implementation ideas. So we
have done that as well and uh typ
typically we ask each of the teams uh
that's working to implement these
technologies or using these technologies
how can they better do within their own
function. So uh we have these uh
questions that we ask ourselves and
improve as we go along. There are many
other ideas that I would be very happy
to share uh down the line. The interest
of time I'm just rushing through this
right now. uh but in a nutshell uh you
know you can we talked about scalability
and adaptability here there are a lot of
ideas here that we uh try to distill
into your our AI policies that are
generally in line with do it policies
and also we have our AI governance
mechanism in place uh that we utilize to
implement any technologies with the
focus of ethics tightly integrated into
our processes and with that I'll pause
here for any questions and thanks for
the opportunity here thank
Thank you very much, doctor. Um, I am
looking I'm not seeing any questions
immediately. Um, I I did want to just
ask kind of my my previous qu question
for you to follow up offline. I mean,
I'd be curious in your use cases kind of
how much money we've actually been able
to save, like what was the initial
investment, how much do we save? Um, and
then looking forward, you know, is there
anything that we need to do to improve
the ability for you to continue to use
AI um, going forward? But thank you very
much for your um, your strong leadership
in this topic. Very much appreciated.
Great presentation.
>> Um, last but certainly not least, we're
going to move over to the Department of
Service and Civic Innovation. Um, we
have the Chief Information Officer,
Isaac Fridin, with us. Isaac, thank you
so much for joining us.
Thank you very much, Chair Hester, Chair
Kaiser, and members of the committee. I
am going to
share some slides today. Can you let me
know if you are able to see the slides?
>> You know, I could, but now it's gone
blank. Yes, now I can see it again.
You're good.
>> Excellent. Um, well, thank you again um
for for having us here today. For those
that I have not met, my name is Isaac
Frumpin. I serve as the chief
information officer for the Maryland
Department of Service and Civic
Innovation. Um, our agency DSCI was
created in 2023
um with the passage of SB551, otherwise
known as the Serve Act, which some
members of this very committee helped to
sponsor. Um, so thank you all for your
support. Um, our agency is tasked with
promoting service and volunteerism in
the state of Maryland, including
administering and establishing the
Maryland core service year option
program as well as legacy service
programs in Maryland. Um, the use cases
that we'll that I'll be walking through
today are leveraged by the Maryland core
service option program. So, some brief
context on that program again, it was
established in 2023. We re we recently
launched the third class of the program.
So we have two alumni classes. This is a
nine-month service and workforce
development program. Um we have members
from all 24 jurisdictions in the state
of Maryland placed at over 200
organizations across the state. Um and
these members get professional
development experience over their
service term, financial literacy
training, uh alumni network, and
building social capital over the course
of the program. They also um are able to
earn a completion award on upon their
completion of their 9month service term.
So in the interest of time, I'm going to
start today with walking through use
cases that our agency is already
leveraging to support the Maryland core
service option program.
The first use case is a virtual
introductory conversation.
This use case is for folks who are
applying to the Maryland core service
your option program to be members. The
program itself has two pathways. One for
18 to 24 year olds and then one for
adults of all ages over the age of 18.
And this use case is a a Gentic
experience where uh applicants have the
opportunity to interact with um AI
through a chat feature or by actually
talking to the AI and the conversation
is structured as reaffirming benefits
and expectations of the program as well
as collecting skills and interests to
inform the matching process. Um there is
key information that is collected during
this process which helps to make for a
more efficient matching process. And so
in terms of scalability, this is a key
functionality that allows our human team
that supports the matching process to
focus on higher value interactions um
rather than the standard collection of
certain data points.
So this is one use case um that our
agency is leveraging with regards to AI.
A second use case is matching
assistance. So after members complete
that initial experience,
they move into the matching process.
This is the process by which our team
works with the applicants to the program
um as well as the organizations that are
interested in hosting members as part of
the program
and help facilitate matches based on
members skills and interests, based on
meaningful growth opportunities across
the state, and based on commute. um
because members are able to get to
locations that are presumably close to
where they live. So, it's taking into
account a lot of those considerations.
We were able to develop um another AI
experience that helps members to
navigate this process
to to put it into practice. What happens
when members engage with this experience
is they might come to our application
and matching portal and say, "Hey, which
jobs do you think are best for me? I
would be really interested in working in
education or I love working with my
hands and working outside." And so the
models that power this experience
help to pull information from the job
descriptions that organizations have
submitted and help to match that data
with the members self-reported skills
and interests to help them navigate
their job search. Um, we found this to
be especi especi especially meaningful
with our younger applicants. A majority
of the applicants that apply to the
service your option pathway which is the
pathway I mentioned that's for 18 to 24
year olds. It's their first ever time
searching for a full-time job. And if if
everyone can remember their first time
searching for a full-time job, it can be
an overwhelming experience. And so the
ability for them to have 247 access to
an experience that can give them
guidance on the process, that can
provide interview support is something
that we found helpful for our
applicants. And I also want to point out
we do have a human team that also
supports this process. And so the idea
with this experience is that again from
an accessibility standpoint, from a
scalability standpoint, it can help to
provide a lot of initial guidance. But
our team of human matching captains are
also regularly in touch with applicants
and organizations as they go through
this process.
One other point that I'd like to mention
here that's relevant to both this use
case and the first use case is that
based on the responsible AI use policy
um that department of information
technology has has put out is both these
use cases have been classified as
limited risk. The data is all canared in
a contained in a closed system. Um it
follows a lot of industry-leading
security standards. um and no
information beyond their the skills and
interest data that's a need to make
recommendations is actually used to
power the model to make recommendations.
So in a lot of ways
these use cases are less biased than the
bias that might be introduced by a human
interacting with someone that can see
someone's demographic profile that can
see their age profile that can see um th
those characteristics.
The third use case that our agency has
been able to leverage is offer letter
verification.
So you, if you've been following me
through the applicant experience, they
have their virtual introductory
conversation. They they engage in the
matching process and get assistance with
the matching process. And then hopefully
they receive an offer letter from the
organization um that they've interviewed
with and and um had a successful
interview thanks to use case 2
hopefully. And so the organizations
present them with an offer letter.
These offer letters are required to have
certain criteria that our agency has
laid out, including making sure that the
offer letters have a the right start
date, the right end date, that the
employees are making at least minimum
wage, that they're working a certain
number of hours per week, that they're
being offered health benefits, that they
have a supervisor and mentor um noted in
the offer letter.
And what we've done in past classes is
we've had humans manually reviewing the
offer letters to make sure they meet
this criteria. Um as the the size of the
program grows, as the number of
applicants and host organization grows,
um the time spent on manually reviewing
these offer letters is another area
where we found that introducing AI can
help to allow our human team to spend
more time on h higher value touch
points. Um there's also a level of
increased accuracy by ensuring that um
there's a standardized set of criteria
that's applied to all offer letters. And
in terms of protecting our members, it
it helps to save our staff time, but
it's also a measure to protect members
to ensure like I mentioned that they
have a mentor and supervisor at their
site to ensure that they're being
offered health benefits. And so um that
that's where this use case has has come
into play.
And then the last use case that I want
to mention is uh is functionality that
members of the Maryland core service
your option program have access to when
they are actually in the program itself.
So within their learning portal, they
have access to an experience that they
can interact with to get explanations
and for instance if they need help
drafting a professional email or they've
been tasked with creating a work plan
for a project and they're looking for
advice on how to get started. And so
this opportunity has helped our members
to improve their productivity. Again, as
I mentioned earlier, for a lot of our
members, it's their first ever full-time
job experience. And so, this is a tool
that they have to to improve their
productivity. Um, our agency is is very
data driven and one of the ways we've
been able to realize success here is we
administer a pre-ervice survey. We
administer an end of service survey. And
among the the questions we ask are
confidence and knowledge of how to
leverage AI tools in the workplace. And
we saw a really meaningful increase in
the most recent class they graduated
from the beginning of the term to the
end of the term in terms of their
self-reported confidence.
So th those are the four use cases um
that our agency is currently leveraging
um with the Maryland core service option
program. Um all these use cases are um
are structured to align with Dit's
responsible AI use policy. um we've been
able to meet with the AI enablement team
that was that was presenting earlier to
attend their office hours and join the
community of practice. Um so we've
really benefited from Dit's expertise
and leadership here. um in terms of
agency responsibilities that are
outlined in that AI responsible use
policy, I serve as our uh AI lead and um
am actively working to in upskill myself
and our agency with our knowledge of how
to leverage AI. Um we are following the
AI intake process and um some of the
other requirements that apply more to
high-risk implement use cases we are
monitoring. So, we'll we'll make sure to
be um following if in the future we ever
do have a a higher risk use case.
Again, just summarizing the benefits of
of these use cases. We're able to
provide personalized and objective
career insights to applicants and and
members that are part of the Maryland
core service option program. Um and then
in terms of scalability and
accessibility, these tools help to
process high volumes of applicants and
are available 247 for members to
interact with as a first step. Um and
there's always the opportunity and
availability for members and applicants
to engage with our our staff as well. So
the the support does not end with these
use cases. It's merely a tool that our
agency is is leveraging to provide added
value.
Thank Oops.
Uh, Mr. Frumpkin, I think we're about at
time. Um, I wanted to thank you so much.
Um, I've followed your work and you're
definitely one of the shining stars. Um,
you know, of all of our agencies. So,
thank you for everything that you put
in. Um, I'm going to follow up offline
with a couple of questions, um, you
know, about your keys to success and,
um, what you see going forward and the
ROI, but I'll send that by email. Um,
thank you very very very much. And if
others have questions for the Department
of Service and Civic Innovation, please
make sure that staff has them um as
quickly as possible. Okay. Um, with
that, uh, we are now going to switch
gears for the last portion of our, um,
hearing today. Uh, we've covered
everything that Maryland is doing and
now we're moving on to some other
leading states and cities. And first up
we have um we have the city of Denver of
in Colorado. Um Denver has been a
pioneer in their AI powered chatbot um
Sunny which uh engaged engages in 72
languages with a 90% customer
satisfaction score. Their innovation
center earned Denver 311 first place in
the city category of government
experience awards from the center for
digital government. Um, and so with
that, I would like to welcome Laura
Dunwy. And Laura, thank you for your
patience with us. Um, you are on the
air.
>> Of course. Thank you. Uh, now I'm going
to embarrass myself because I did I'm
not a normal Zoom user. How do I share
my screen here? Can someone tell me real
quick?
>> There should be a little green button on
the bottom of your page. It says share.
>> The the bright green one.
Yes. Thank you.
>> And I'm hoping it's enabled. And I'm now
seeing your presentation, although it's
not yet in presentation mode.
>> All right, here we go.
Thank you for that.
>> Great. We we see it now.
>> Okay. Excellent. So, um this is my
second opportunity to present to a group
of you important individuals in
Maryland. Um, I kind of got into your
world through a visit from Senator
Cheryl Kagan a number of years ago. Um,
God, it's been a while now that we've
known each other. Um, I think it was uh
late 2019 late 2019, early 2020
and uh just before COVID. So, Senator
Kagan got one of the last tours of my
on-site 311 call center in all its
regalia with 50 people and lots of noise
and great things going on. and um we
have stayed in touch over the years and
I have been a big fan of her vision of
having a 311
type of a ecosystem that could serve not
only individual cities and counties but
potentially the whole state of Maryland
and we have uh stayed in touch and I
hope Senator Kagan has um avoided a
lesson h here or there that she had to
learn because I was able to pass them
respond to her along with our best
practices. So with that, I'll give you a
little background on 311 in general and
then we'll get into the AI components.
So, in um in two 2006,
replaced the the ability to call three
digits in Denver replaced the need for
residents to navigate over 2500
different phone numbers that could get
you to different areas in the city,
different agencies, different desks in
different agencies. it. You really
needed to get out your secret Dakota
ring if you needed to figure out how to
get a permit to redo your bathroom or
order a new garbage can. So, that was um
a very we we totally stole the playbook
from Baltimore. Baltimore was the first
and um
and off we went and created a a holistic
call center where people who want to do
business or ask questions about the city
and county of Denver could come.
So what we offer and how you access it.
So it's a one-stop shop. you can talk to
us about anything that goes on in
Denver, any services that the city
present pre uh the city provides and how
to navigate Denver as a whole. Denver is
a pretty I I imagine much like
Baltimore. Denver is a a pretty um
popular city to visit. So, we got really
clear really early that it wasn't just
the people who live here. Our audience
is the people who live, work, and play
in Denver. So, our 311 short code is
available to anyone who is in Denver.
Uh, we provide a 10-digit number for
anyone who might be coming and wants to
do a little pre-work. So, they can they
can get into us and and talk to us even
though they're not yet in the city and
county of Denver.
Callers can reach us um with through
three channels. First one we had was
calling the live agents back in 2006.
That was the gold standard for customer
service. You be open when I want you to
be open. You answer the phone quickly.
You are friendly to me. And you give me
the answer I want. That was a 10 out of
10 in customer service.
Then we got into um the tw the 2000s a
little bit later and it became obvious
that there were some opportunities to do
some quick online service selfservice
opportunities for people. So we created
the online services hub which is
basically just a portal on our
denvergov.org org website that allows
you to by typing in your contact
information, your name, your address,
your email, and then we give you a menu
of templates of what you're trying to
accomplish. So, you want to report a
pothole, you want to order a garbage
can, those types of things. We allow you
to enter those on your own that creates
a ticket, a work ticket that goes
directly to street maintenance or solid
waste. and they then take it from there
and get get your services handled for
you. in um I think it was really around
about 2019
we started to think about next
iterations using online services and we
didn't start with we need AI but we
started with what is the problem that we
want to solve and the problem was as
these digital babies grow and start
buying houses they are less and less
aligned with my old definition of
customer service, which is if you call,
I answer quickly and and friendly and
give you a good answer. They see even
having to call as a fail.
And I res recently read a industry, a
customer service industry, not a
government industry, uh um paper that
said that the average customer will
search on a website for 20 minutes to
avoid a threeinut phone call. And I kind
of chuckled when I read that, but then I
I thought that's me. That's absolutely
me. And I can tell you that having after
having read that paper, I did it again.
I do it again. So, I think we've just
started to become more and more of
self-service
type of people and we want to do it
ourselves and we want it to be easy and
we want it to be fast. So, we started
looking at a chatbot.
So, relative to 311 in general, what's
working and what are the challenges?
There's so many ch there's so many
what's working. There's really only one
challenge. The single point of contact
for question and services. Brilliant.
Easy to remember the three-digit number.
We have a our phones set up now. We
actually have 14 call centers. 311 is
the largest. We have 14 call centers.
When you call 311, you get uh responded
to by a smart IVR that will ask you what
you want assistance with. Based on your
answer, your call will be routed to any
one of our 14 call centers. So, we're no
longer using 311 like a receptionist
where everybody went to 311 and then you
said, "I need a really complicated
permit to build a garage and we sent you
over to community planning and
development." So, two calls there. We
have streamlined that so you get to the
right call center, talk to the right
agent in the in the first time.
Um the additional service options has
been something that we've been able to
uh flex a little bit and grow on with
the online services hub and Sunny. Uh
this has allowed our agencies to devote
themselves to the service delivery. I do
not want someone in road maintenance
talking about potholes. I want them
filling potholes. And this is a way that
we could carve out time and space
compared to how it formerly was handled
to give them time back to actually do
the work. Uh the integrated phone system
makes it easy to call transfer calls
within the system and um the fact that
all most of my agencies who have
resident facing services have been
willing to create their own call centers
has made that much easier. used to be um
it would the call would do uh like a a
search like it would ring at different
people's desk to try to find somebody
who was there. Those were called hunt
groups. Um this has streamlined
everything from the resident perspective
quite well. The only challenges with a
311 is it creates a firewall between
these agencies and their customers. So
what I am constantly on the hunt for is
agencies
simply because they don't know what they
don't know making decisions that benefit
the agency and may not have taken the
resident experience into consideration
because I'm holding on to their resident
experience. I'm their buffer. So, I
would say any and and that could be if
you go to a uh a state model, that's
something you're really going to wa want
to watch out for is making sure that you
find a way to feed back to the agencies
their customer sentiments, their
feelings about the work being done, the
timing on the work, all that good stuff.
You don't want to you don't want to
block them from that information.
So 2020 comes around, COVID hits.
All of a sudden, everybody's talking
about AI.
Here's what every IT director Here's a
conversation every IT director had
repeatedly over the last few years. Who
who are we? We're the bosses. What do we
want? AI. AI to do what? We don't know.
When do you want it? Right now. So that
was kind of one of our, you know, our
recurring kind of themes was the AI is
going to fix everything. Well, here's
here's the the kind of the reality
around that. And and often, and I
apologize if it happens now, but often
people ask me to come talk to them about
AI, and when I start to talk to them
about data, it kind of sucks all the air
out of the room. But I'll tell you of
lessons learned here. So you don't have
to your best AI tool will be terrible if
it is using bad data as its underlying
root source. So for all the work you do
on AI and how you use it and what tools
you choose, make sure you're doing a
thousand% vet on the underlying data
you're going to turn it loose on because
that is as impactful as anything on the
quality of the chatbot that you're going
to get. So as we were going down that
line and through a couple of stumbles,
we kind of sat down in the technology
department and we said, "What is AI to
us? What is it? Is it is this like going
to redefine everything or and we just
need to go and try to um you know
leapfrog processes that haven't been
looked at in years and data that hasn't
been curated?" And we found out very
quickly that that was a fool's errand.
it was not going to improve anything
really. So what Denver's determined is
for us AI is not a strategy. AI is a
tool and it's a very powerful tool when
we apply it to the right problems.
One of the problems that we had was we
had we had um we were coming into a
place where we knew that we wanted to
spend more of our city dollars on things
that would make would kind of stem the
tide on some things like homelessness
was getting a little out of control or
was a lot out of control after we came
out of COVID. Um, and we wanted to be
able to funnel as much money as we could
to these uh to these initiatives that
were going to make the downtown Denver
area come back to life. We had sent
everybody home. That meant all of our,
you know, our sandwich cart people
weren't coming down anymore and selling
sandwiches. We just had a you could
almost shoot a cannon off in the middle
of downtown Denver in the middle of a
business day and not hit anybody. And we
really needed to reverse that because
that has so much so much impact. It has
impact on finances. It has impact on who
wants to continue to do business here,
who wants to bring business here. And we
have used huge tourist dollars that we
depend on. So who wants to come and
visit? And so revitalizing Denver needed
to be a focus for spend. Everybody
started looking at where can we do
things cheaper.
In 2024,
I had or rather 2023, I had 24 people
that were taking calls for customer
service and helping our customers.
Typically, people held less than two
minutes. They told us based on surveys
that they got very good service. So that
was all well and good, but I knew that
there were things that where AI
specifically was going to be a very good
fit for modernizing the customer service
experience. You know, um I blame Amazon.
They've ruined customer service for
everybody who sits in a seat like mine.
Um, you know, people will when I started
to talk about the idea of a chatbot to
augment 311, people were kind of like, I
don't know, you know, we really like to
call people, people who residents want
to talk to a person, you know, and I
would ask the question, how many people
in this room have think Amazon customer
service is great?
Oh, now my Amazon is talking to me. And
every hand would go up in the room. And
then I would say, "How many of you have
ever spoken to anyone at Amazon?" And
virtually every hand would go down. And
then now I've got them thinking along
the lines of not them their work
persona, but them their customer
persona, the them as a customer. And
they started to become open to the idea.
You're you're right. I really do self-s
serve much more often than um you know,
than I even go into a store anymore, you
know. And I kind of equate it to, you
know, my parents' generation who at tax
time got in the car, drove to the tax
office for their property taxes, wrote
out a check, handed it to a clerk, and
got a paper receipt, and maybe grabbed
lunch on the way home, and that was
fabulous. I can't even imagine if
somebody said to the des Denver
residents as a whole, "Sorry, you need
to come in and bring a check to pay your
property taxes now." Like, that would
not fly. not we we would end up putting
leans on everybody's houses because they
just wouldn't do it. So we really tried
to look at where is our audience going.
Our audience is going to self-s serve.
So we looked at what are the options. AI
is a perfect fit for this. So before
um kind of in parallel I had to do two
things. I had to find a good vendor
because
creating an AI chatbot can either be
turnkey with one type of vendor or it
can be build your own skyscraper with
some of the big box type uh vendors. So
I started with the big box, Google,
um I started with Meta,
Amazon, all the big ones. And generally
their uh their their pitch is absolutely
we can do that. Didn't matter what I
asked them. Absolutely we could do that.
My problem as a city government was I
had no money and no resources.
And I say that kind of flippantly, but
it was pretty close. And so I found a
smaller vendor who uh who specializes in
city and county government and um they
happen to be a neighbor of yours kind of
in South Carolina and um we worked
closely with them and they really
created a chatbot for us. They
integrated the systems for us. We
integrate with our CRM Salesforce so
people can use the bot to create their
own tickets. So now I have a system
where rather than having to uh call
somebody or go to your internet and go
to the web and find the right page to
request something, you can literally
just grab your phone and you can talk to
Sunny by text. So you can it it's all
over the website. It's on every page in
the website. So what I like to do at
this point is rather than tell you about
Sunny is invite you to interact with it.
So that short code, hey 311, works
anywhere in the country. So if you go
into your smartphone and as if you were
going to send a text message to a friend
and instead of typing in their phone
number, you type in, "Hey 311," you'll
immediately be talking to Sunny. You
can't do any any harm to it. So go in
and play. It will It's GI GIS uh fenced,
geo fenced, so it won't let you report a
pothole in Maryland and nobody's going
to come running out there to fix it for
you. Thank God. So So feel free to get
in there and play. You know, ask what
what do I need a permit to build a
fence? Um do how do I get a new garbage
can? What's going on in Denver this
weekend? And what we're encouraging
people to do in their marketing in our
what we are doing in our marketing that
to encourage residents is put this in
your phone like a contact and you drive
past a pothole, click a picture of it,
attach it, send it, and within 15
seconds the road maintenance people will
have a picture and a report of a pothole
that they can then act on right away.
So, Sunny from a technical tool has been
incredible. We measure satisfaction
right out of the gate. We had um about
an 85 to 90% satisfaction by the users.
I go want to go back to data for a
second though. A lot of that success is
because it took me two years or so to
convince the powers that be in Denver
that this was worth investing in. And I
took all of that time to curate
denvergov.org website. When we started,
we had over 4,000 pages. We had acronyms
all over it, which do not translate well
in a bot. We had a reading language that
was probably at least 12th grade, if not
some college. So, we we took the
language down to a sixth grade reading
level. We eliminated as many acronyms as
we could. We got rid of any duplicate
type of information. I learn I learned
really quickly that at least in Denver,
the the bad definition of transparency,
government transparency, was throw it
all up against the wall and see what
sticks. And we hadn't done a very good
job of curating our data. So we we took
the time to do that. And I cannot
emphasize enough to you guys that you
the success of any automation you do
will be either fly or crash based on the
quality of the data that is at its root.
One of the most interesting things we
learned with Sunny in Denver, we have
historically thought that we we know we
obviously have a big English community.
Denver has a big Hispanic community, so
we knew Spanish was a big language. And
then we kind of had a a perception that
if we got Vietnamese, like if we were
doing notifications or um you know
either at the back in the day when we
have flyers, which we still have some of
those, and um and even um social media
marketing, if we got Spanish, English,
and Vietnamese, we felt like that we had
hit struck the the major communities in
Denver. From the minute we launched
Sunny, which has a capability to
interact in 72 different languages, you
do, if you want to interact with it, you
do not have to like pick a dropbox and
grab your language. You just start
communicating in your language and it
recognizes it and responds back in kind.
On day one, we started seeing an array
of languages being used by people in the
city and county of Denver that I think
without fail blew everybody away. We get
Finnish, we get Czechoslovakian, we get
Udu, we get um all the Arab countries,
we get the variety of um Chinese
languages. Um
Polynesia,
uh I mean it just goes on and on. We've
so far this year we've we've interacted
using Sunny in 42 languages. And what we
found is that
the everything they come to us for can't
be solved by the bot. So we have to
eventually translate that over to a work
order and get a person involved and it's
usually an English- speakaking person.
And we bring in translators and we do
all that typical stuff. But one of the
things that's made the interactions, the
subsequent interactions so much more
powerful is it makes a difference if the
resident can express their need in their
native language. They're not fumbling
for words in English to describe what
they want. They can describe it really
well, really succinctly, and and then we
can kind of take that from there and go.
So you eliminate that frustration by
that non-English-speaking person of I
can't even figure out how to tell you
what I need. So lot lots and lots of
wonderful data. I think you will find
that you are much more diverse than you
realize.
>> Laura, I'm just going to interrupt for
just a second. I got lost for a second
talking to to Sunny. I asked him about
um where I could find child care, but um
I think we're running a little short on
time. if you're able to wrap up in the
next few minutes, that would be great.
>> Thank you.
>> Yep. So, and then you have all the
digital efficiencies, and there's one
one here that I think is um it's worth
going a little over on if we are. So,
when when I look at my cost to serve,
when someone calls an agent, calls 311,
talks to an agent, gets their needs met,
off they go. Most calls are four minutes
or less, off they go. That is a $4 cost
to the city and county of Denver. The
chatbot interaction cost me 35. So I
mentioned in 2023 I had 24 customer
service agents. I had a under twominut
average speed of answer and a 90%
satisfaction rate. Today I have 14
customer service agents, a twominute
ASA, and a 90%
customer experience uh satisfaction
rate. So I've been able to drop the cost
to serve significantly on 40% of my
interactions, which is the amount that
the bot and my online services hub is
handling. So the the um this is a unique
moment in customer service history where
people are clamming for your lowest cost
to serve option that has never happened
before in my career. So to not take
advantage of that is is a miss. And I
will say that um while these seem like
nice to have things today,
I was in a boys and girls school
yesterday where they uh where they just
launched a digital center for kids
starting at 8 years old. When those kids
become homeowners, they are not going to
send checks anywhere. They are not going
to call us. They are going to absolutely
demand that they be able to handle all
this business work with the city
digitally and we're just on the cusp of
learning how to do this and how to do it
well.
There's some go to market lessons um and
I spoke about most of them and you guys
will have the deck so I'll leave this
and then recommend recommendations for
Maryland. I suggest that a you not try
to recreate the phone system 311. It's
too much data. It's too many different
systems. It's too much data to expect
any one customer service agent to be
able to absorb. So, what I'm suggesting
is you start with a chatbot. You can
give all the various cities and counties
databases, their websites as the root
data, and you'll be able to turn out a
really productive product. The key will
be the curation of the underlying data.
And that's it.
>> Thank Thank you very much. I see that
Senator Cheryl Kagan has a question.
>> Thank you, Senator Hester. Uh, Madam
Chair, uh, Laura, you're awesome. Thank
you for investing, continuing to invest
so much time and give so generously to
Maryland through our journey in this.
>> I know one day I'm going to get a
Maryland oyster out of it.
>> I think we're gonna have to hook you up
with something.
>> And I I'm doing this for the oyster.
Well, Senator Rosa is here and delegate
Feldmark and they are just two of the
real and delegate Hill, you know, so in
addition to the chair, they're just so
many smart people on on all of this. So,
thank you. Um, so two things for those
of us who are unaware, uh, we've been
working on exploring a statewide 311 in
Maryland for many years, as Laura
referenced, and the work group that I
chair uh has gone very, very well. Sarah
Elalami um uh from the department of
information technology, DLS and others
have just really contributed and uh we
have no opposition. The one piece Laura
that I just want to make sure is in this
conversation uh you've talked about the
per call cost. Could you tell us how
much it was to set up Denver City,
Denver County when you first launched
and how big a check you just wrote this
year for one year of service? Um, so
those numbers I think are going to
startle my friends and colleagues.
>> I I think you're right and I was remiss
in not calling that out because it is
amazing. Um, the the first year which
was the buildout, the integration with
Salesforce Marketing Cloud, the training
of my IT support people, and the actual
launch was under $2,000, under $200,000.
>> This year, since we're past launch,
>> right, Jim?
This year, since we're past launch, it
actually came down to $78,000.
Now, here's here's the kicker, though.
Here's the kicker. I told you we're
doing 40% of our interactions now
digitally. That's 40% of 750,000
interactions. So just very quickly uh uh
madame chair Laura and Denver just won a
very prestigious national award for
their 311. So we are students of the
right folks. Uh Vice Chair Rosep since
when I got together with Chair Gazone
and talked about this. Um, Senator
Corderman has been my partner on 311 and
shares the uh the governance um and
looking at the fiscal issues. And we got
a a rough back of the envelope of $400
and something thousands to go statewide
in Maryland. So less than half a
million. And we lost our minds. We said
even if it's doubled, tripled,
quadrupled,
it's less than $2 million. And uh Chair
Gazone was like, "Okay, wait. Where's my
checkbook? Like he was ready to to sign
the check right there. It lowers uh
lowers the burden on our 911 senators uh
centers, delegate Feldmark, as we've
been discussing. Uh it provides
statewide customer service for our
residents and visitors. Uh and we use AI
in a way that is just extraordinary,
safe, and private. So very exciting.
Laura, thank you. Madam Chair, thank you
for letting me speak.
>> And I will say this, Sunny's actually
won a number of awards. The most
prestigious probably is from CIO
magazine. We won uh CIO 100. So, one of
the 100 best technology efforts in 2025,
and I'm super proud of that. Um, but I
want to tell you, you guys, uh, you
know, Denver's here for you. We want to
help you learn, take all the best of
what we learn and avoid all the worst if
you get the right vendor. Another very
important thing is our resource drain on
my technology service team was almost
zero. It literally was a handful of
phone calls to allow my vendor to get
access to our our systems and they did
the work for us. So, choose your vendor
carefully. Cheryl knows my
recommendation and um and and then lean
on us to help you through the through
the buildout and the launch. And we're
here for you. Bless you, Laura. Thank
you. Thank you. Thank
>> Thank you so much, Laura. Um, and thank
you for your continued leadership,
Senator Kagan. Senator Rosip, do you
have a quick question for Laura?
>> I I hope it's a very quick question. I
apologize. I've been in and out, so I
may have missed this.
>> But I get it. Makes sense. I'm all in.
I'm very forwardleaning on um
implementing AI for for everything we
can do it with. My question is what
applications did you think of and they
turned out to be not a good idea?
>> Well, you know, um Dr. Kasham when he
was talking talked about and the
questions that were posed to him were
around bias and we are looking at AI. I
wouldn't say we decided no on it, but we
decided that we need to plan for with
much of AI that replaces city worker
work or augments city worker work, we
need to insert human in the loop steps
in the process. And then from a
long-term perspective, what do what how
do we prepare to protect oursel from
these things when we don't have people
like us on these decision-making boards
anymore? Everybody grew up with AI.
Everybody just trusts it and off it
goes. You know, that's my that's my
bigger fear. I think we've got enough
people right now as this is new who are
looking to um protect against things
like that. But you know right now I
think we pretend we don't have a huge
bias issue because it's at the
individual human level. This actually
can potentially give us an opportunity
to actually see data that represents how
bad is our bias and then look at
creating uh because then you can re then
you can re-engineer it.
>> Absolutely.
>> You know you can re once you know it. If
you my my marching orders day in day out
in my life is if I cannot measure it I
cannot manage it. So whether AI turns
out to be a great tool to ultimately do
what you want to do with less human
interaction translation, let's be
honest, less cost
>> then. But before you even get there,
just getting the data into AI and
getting AI calling out those things
you're looking for like bias will help
you make better decisions going forward
whether your solution incorporates AI or
not. That's why I say 311 and city in
Denver were saying AI is not a strategy.
AI is a really big it's like I've got
the biggest power tool in my toolkit
right now that I never had before. But
not not everything needs a sledgehammer,
right? So it's like when do I use the
sledgehammer and how do I use the
sledgehammer? But if a Phillips head
screwdriver is what's needed, that is
not going to work. So I often caution
especially kind of it becomes like an
ecosystem thing of when do we want AI
now? What do we want it for? We don't
know. You know, that was kind of half
joking in that slide, but um it is a
tool and it can be used in different
ways to do different things really well.
And it it is not a throw it at
everything and you you if you have
20-year-old processes that you haven't
improved, you still need to do that. If
you have data you haven't curated in a
very long time, you still need to do
that.
>> Thank you.
Delegate Hill, do you have a very quick
question?
>> Really quick, thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you for the presentation. Uh,
how do you define and track your your
error rates and have you improve them
with the system you described?
>> Yeah. Yeah. So, we we let uh we I have
someone who reviews the transactions as
the as the bot use is getting bigger.
That's getting a little bit harder to
do. So now we're doing a percentage of
the of the reactions, but we also give
our um our users the ability to tell us
that it's not working for them. So a
thumbs down. And if the bot perceives
that it hits a wall where it's not able
to satisfy the user, it translates into
a message, a free form message to a 311
agent who will actually call the person
back. And then that agent will get with
my bot people, my bot tenders, and we'll
figure out why it didn't work. So, it's
very much a um it's a nuanced
process. I look at my overall
satisfaction rate for the bot to tell me
in general, am I doing well? Right out
of the gate, we were at 85% plus. Most
days were around 90 between 89 and 92.
Um and we do look at the every one of
them that says thumbs down and we figure
out what it is and then we we can
massage the data. What we normally find
though is the problem is not with the
chatbot. The problem is the agency
underlying that the question is being
asked about made a change in their
process and procedure and did not update
their website.
>> Makes sense.
>> Imagine, right?
>> Yeah, makes perfect sense.
>> Well, thank you again, Laura. That's
great to uh meet you over Zoom and thank
you for all your support of uh the state
of Maryland. Um, we've got a lot a lot
to learn and we've got great leadership
here at home to do it. Um,
>> okay. I'm pleased to be able to help and
yeah, save an oyster for me.
>> Okay, we'll do.
>> Um, okay. So, we are now moving on uh
further further west across the country
to Oregon. Um, I'm pleased to introduce
uh Nathan Singer, director of the Oregon
Eligibility Partnership within the
Oregon Department of Human Services. Um,
they have also developed an internal
chatbot tool that helps staff navigate
complex eligibility systems covering
medical, food, cash, and child care
benefits for more than 1.5 million
customers. Um, and for this work, uh,
the ODHS has received the American
Public Humane Services Association's
Award for the best use of technology.
So, with that, I'll turn it over to you,
Nathan. And we are so glad that you're
here. We are running a bit short on
time, so brevity is key, but we're
really glad that you could join us today
by Zoom. Thank you so much.
>> Thank you. Uh, chair, members of the
committee, for the record, my name is
Nate Singer. I'm, as you've heard, the
Oregon Eligibility Partnership Director.
I'm going to share my screen, but I'm
going to move through. You've already
heard most of the key things that uh,
you know, any state should be doing, any
individual should be doing is looking at
technology related to areas. I think you
have really good messaging. I just um
appreciate the work you're doing. As
shared for with the state of Oregon, uh
I'm responsible for eligibility
operations and systems. So both the
staff that do the work as well as the
systems on behalf of three state
agencies. So consolidated underneath
those agencies for the work. In Oregon,
there's 4.2 million people and over a
third of them receive some sort of
service directly from us in the state of
Oregon. And so how can we support them?
But more importantly, how can we support
staff? Here's a whole bunch of numbers
things. It's good. We're going to pass
it because that's not important for you
today. It's in your area around it. But
basically, we serve a lot of individuals
as you've heard today. Just kind of
setting some context. I'm going to talk
about the our bot specifically that we
use, but we use AI in different ways
across our state. Um there are multiple
types when we talk about artificial
intelligence as you've heard from your
own committees and as you're aware
related to this we have our rules-based
AI that had really predefined rules and
scripts you say A B or C the system on
it could return C as a response we have
robotic process automation where it can
automate repetitive rules-based tasks
then we move into large language models
and generative AI which really allowed
us to create new content for the first
time where the systems are able to work
through that and then we're moving into
agentic AI where really it's that
planning reasoning and able to cross
with large language databases and people
and do a further service for individuals
in Oregon. These are just some examples.
We have a lot more actually than on here
of things we do. We have our basic
chatbot Google I know is on here uh and
you all use inside of a service. We have
a basic chatbot that's rules-based. We
use robotic process automation similar
to what your agencies were sharing
earlier today to automate return mail.
It's a good example. We're able to um
I'm going to say eliminate a whole unit,
but we're going to actually repurpose a
whole unit and move those staff to other
priority work by automating all the
areas through it. We're using large
language modules to do um translation
works to do activities to increase the
way we communicate past payub automation
and then I'll talk about eligibot or
internal tools and then we're building
out interview bots. So when people come
and apply both on the staff side as well
as on the person applying side there's
someone there helping them move through
these areas.
But today really wanted to talk about
just for a minute what we built
internally inside of this. The eligibots
a cute name we staff gave to it. We give
staff the opportunity to provide input
around how they do these things. And the
goal really was what could we measure
and do to be able to help out with our
workload and make sure we're providing
accurate and quality information. In the
state of Oregon, we've seen our case
load grow significantly. Oregon has
expanded medical, child care, and SNAP
eligibility over the last five years.
Our case load has grown by over 600,000
additional individuals without the
staffing. the legislature and making
decisions around it. We are funded at
43% of the staff we need. And so to to
the tool analogy, we needed to find a
way to be more efficient. We couldn't
continue to sit in the same way. As
you've heard from Denver and from your
own agencies today, we know people want
to interact differently. We have a
mobile application that the second
oldest person in Oregon utilizes.
These are it's different than what
people assume. When they say, "Oh, a
senior is not going to use this." I sit
there and go, they use it every day in
their lives. Not everyone will. We have
people inside of it, but we look at what
we can do there. And so what we really
did was look at how we can build out an
internal bot. And I'll give you some
stats around this in a second, but you
can see here from September of 2024 to
June of 2025, we basically looked at
what we could do to build this out. You
heard around the importance of data. One
of the key things for us is for our
staff, this was really focused on
internal staff and helping them. There
were over 550 unique resources that the
department had for them to do their
jobs. Some manuals up to over 1500
pages. How am I supposed to tell someone
what they're eligible for and engage
with them if I'm looking across 550
different resources and trying to
control find something in those
documents? It's prone to errors, taking
time, and frustrating for staff and
individuals. And so we said, how can we
bring this on here? One of the key
things for us is because of our
organization, we own all those
resources. So we wanted a process to
make sure our data was clean and able to
be updated and curated and brought into
the system on a regular basis. So we did
that and rolled it out slowly partly
because of the fear of AI related to it.
But I'll share kind of our uptick here
in just a minute. This is just a picture
of an the AI bot and a response. It's
blurry because I took a terrible
picture. I should have given comms the
job to do this or AI to do it. But as we
look towards it, what I want to share is
it doesn't look fancy. We we didn't want
to overwhelm relate related to this
basic areas related to it, a picture
related to it. But you can see in there
it gives a quick response to the staff.
It has the materials. They can click and
go to the core materials and respond
related to it and provide information
that they needed for these programs.
Again, if you combine in many states,
Maryland, similar, where you have staff
and counties doing work across multiple
programs, just taking medical and SNAP
program, the amount of rules in the
federal government related to this on
top of state specific rules related to
it are more than the entire tax code by
the United States government. That means
we put tax accountants through school to
get their degrees. our eligibility
workers come in and we give them
training and expect them to go over more
rules, more different complexities as we
go through these areas.
So, what did we see related to this? In
the first 90 days, we answered over
104,000 questions. You'll see a savings
number listed in here. What we really
did is look at the number of hours that
we had savings. We went into this
knowing what we could measure. We have a
lot of data and systems we were
measuring and we also then worked with
staff to validate the measurements. We
knew how long staffs were spending
looking or searching for materials. We
could see both systematically as well as
from their narrative or surveys what it
was taking.
And then we just simply looked at what
it took to do it through the bot. As we
looked at it, there was thumbs ups and
downs, but also chances for staff to put
in auto responses and fill in
information about if they disagreed with
an answer. It really gives a chance to
build this out. Overall, as I mentioned,
when you're 43% funded, you need to save
every person you can. 26 FTE savings a
month. For myself, that is thousands of
more applications I can process timely
around benefits, give correct answers
and information related to it that the
legislature doesn't even bring in. And
our cost relates to this. At that time,
for the first 90 days, we were spending
$2,000 a month. $2,000 a month for 26
FTE savings is the easiest sell I would
ever need to do anywhere. But I didn't
have to go to the Oregon legislature. I
had the funds. I repurposed funds
internal to this. And that's one of the
unique things that we did in Oregon. We
talked to multiple large vendors and
they each pitched their, you know, small
multi-million dollar approach to doing
this. We already had the software. We
had staff that were doing some of this
work in our IT areas. And so we pulled
four staff and said, "Can you build this
out for us?" We put a business person
with them. Can you build this out for
us? So a total cost of $130,000 to staff
one-time builds related to it. Build out
a bot that now exists for us and is
being replicated for child welfare for
other medical CA Medicaid case managers.
their internal bots are being replicated
at a pace so that way every individuals
can do it without that additional cost.
Now we've built it out, been able to do
it and being able to then just continue
to go to it. Our cost right now per
month is around $3,000 per month because
we've increased our number of users and
questions. We have over 50% of staff
using it on a daily basis now to be able
to provide them assistance in other
areas. And that's with the soft launch
where we're not requiring, we want staff
to be able to find it. It's word of
mouth as they grow inside of it each
day. Literally each day we get to see a
growth related to it.
This is just the enterprise tools and my
point on this is not to say anything
around it but to say from a procurement
standpoint that's always a difficult
part for us of which tools and which
vendors are going to use. In this case
we already own all these enterprise
tools across in Oregon. So it was use
the tools that we have. Let's see what
we can do with what we already exist
inside of it. And then this is just
showing these are daily type dashboards
we look at. So uh again this is a little
old as we look towards it but we can
calculate daily ongoing cost savings
$418,000
in redverted cost savings that I could
use towards staff's other times and
other areas. We can see the number of
answers that we had and what are savings
the minutes saved by workers for
eligibility workers here totaled up as
we ramped up around it and that
continues to grow.
Here is just the topics again looking
what you want to measure. We wanted to
make sure we could take this data and
know what people were asking and really
adjust around it so I can see where key
areas are. Um in Oregon we have an
opportunity to improve around our SNAP
accuracy. We took a lot of flexibilities
for that program. Sorry, SNAP or
supplemental nutrition assistance
program or food stamp type program. Um
and so we we knew we needed to improve.
You can see one of our major areas is
income and snap that staff ask about. So
it gives us a chance to see are we
hitting the right areas. Are they using
the tools in effective ways versus you
know mentions at the very first of is AI
going to take my job? That actually was
a high area on the first day or two. It
quickly moved into what was actually
valuable for them. And again here is
another area where we want to see
feedback. So not just feedback that we
have a positive negative but why was it
unhelpful? what information each of
those boxes we can drill down to etc and
go and see what we're getting around the
work where people report inaccuracies
again we have a business person that can
review this daily and go into our
documents and make sure it's updated of
the 173 reported inaccuracies only one
was actually an inaccuracy was not the
bots's part as you heard earlier it's
our own internal area we update every
document every Thursday and so we know
it's going to be updated Thursday and so
we just added a note to let staff know
this is when you would expect the bot to
provide that updated information as we
provide updates in there. The other 172
times it was a chance for us to train
and inform staff on correct information.
So for lessons learned for it, one thing
I just want to share is data is
important. You just heard that from
Denver. You have to have good data, good
information cited, but also don't wait
to start until you have perfect data. Do
not let that get in the way related to
it. have a process to update it going
into the bot. We're doing this with our
child welfare agency right now. As they
go into their bot, they're finding a
number of resources had conflicting
information. They're getting to clean
that up through their initial pilot of
the area internally to it. Make sure you
have a business owner content manager.
This needs to be a partnership. I am not
technology. I am the person when
technology works for me. I'm happy. When
it doesn't, I throw a fit. I'm business.
I'm operations.
And so being able to have us involved is
important. And really again focusing on
things you're familiar with. These are
tools. That is a very important. This is
not, you know, the magic solution to
everything. But the right tools matter
as they use it. And these tools can
significantly help as we move through
areas. As we look across it, again, both
cost savings and time savings around our
work has significantly improved. We see
a 4% increase in productivity from just
the initial pilot related to this which
again equates to multiple thousand
applications improvements in theirs
accuracy has gone up by another 3%
related to it and again at a national
scale when I'm working at it 3% is a big
move when I'm sitting in 80 90% these
are not um big swing opportunities but
it's consistently going there and each
month we're able to see that and again
just continuing to work with staff
I encourage to have endusers, whether
it's your individuals that are using
this work, your agency staff to be
involved related to it. With that, uh,
for time purposes, glad to answer any
questions or all the rest.
>> That was awesome, Nathan. Thank you so
much. Um, maybe just stop screen sharing
for a second so I can see if we have any
final questions.
Senator Rosip.
>> Yeah, thank you. a very interesting
presentation and very uh exciting. I got
two sort of related questions. One is
error rates are a big deal in SNAP.
Error rates are a big deal in Medicaid.
Um
why will this reduce error rates? Give
me the theory as to why it help reduces
error rates.
>> Yeah. uh chair senator um as we look at
this information. I'll give you the
theory and a little data actually that
we can see at this point on it. Um staff
have to go through and provide correct
information. In Oregon for SNAP error
rates, 60% of them are inadvertently
client caused. That means they're
outside of my control completely other
than through interviews and the rest.
40% though are inside of us for Oregon.
Got it.
>> Prove.
>> So as we do it, if they can get correct
information, correct answers and go
through there and avoid those mistakes.
this is only going to help inside of it.
These are complex rules and situations
of does this apply for Medicaid or SNAP.
So really looking there for staff that
utilize the bot,
>> they are 80% more accurate.
>> Okay. 79.66%.
>> Okay. No, you you convince me. No, that
that's that's what I was looking for.
What what's the theory that that you
answered that question brilliantly.
Second question is, are you looking at
the specific question of the new
Medicaid work requirements because
obviously everyone is kind of deep into
that and we're deep into that and in
theory the state has most of the
information that make this work and
we're talking about how do we integrate
all our data and obviously AI can help
do that for sure. But the other issue is
for folks we don't have data for. I have
a constituent who is a longtime human
service uh social services worker who
worked on all the paperwork and she said
she she said she's not I'm not an IT
person she said but in 2025 can't we
make this easy for the people who are
getting benefits to get good information
to us and I said should be possible so
my question to you is how do we do that
>> yeah so again chairs senator yesim Jim
>> yes
>> Jim Jim yes please you know it's always
different states all the rest yes please
so from there yes that's What we're
looking at is we have a lot of data
internally. We know people that are
already working, but if they have to
turn in verification of their education
or the community service events, knowing
also that SNAP work requirements and
Medicaid do not align and completely.
>> It should be an easy portal. I should be
out on my phone, take a picture, have
someone do something, push a button. And
so, one, we've pushed every big vendor
to say every state and territory in this
country has to do this. So this is like
it's a terrible budget time nationally
but it is the easiest sell time ever.
Come up with a solution but make it
easier on the consumer. It should not
fall in the back of staff. Do not send
papers or paperwork. So we are looking
at bots to do that on the front to grab
that information help someone come
through it. That's that angentic AI
approach.
>> So So it's in the works.
>> It is. Yes.
>> Got well keep in touch with us please.
We'll do and and I appreciate just so
you all know your agencies and areas
have been great partners with Oregon. We
continue to talk across how we're going
to handle Medicaid SNAP changes. So,
thank you.
>> Great. Super. Thank you. Thanks, Madam
Chair.
>> That's great to hear, Nathan. Um, thank
you so much for joining us. Um, I in the
interest of time, I'm just I'd love to
just ask you a question and follow up,
but I was just curious when you said,
you know, you you pulled four staff. My
question was about like is your IT
centralized or not centralized? where
did those staff come from? So, we'll
we'll talk offline, but thank you so
very much. You guys are doing great
work. Um, committee members, we are
running just a touch over. Um, I am
certainly willing to stay on till 1:15.
If you guys have to jump, feel free. I
will record the whole thing so you can
watch the reruns. But our final
presenter today is um from Google. We
have Christopher me, head of customer
engineering, state, local government,
and education from the public sector. um
and they have several examples from
other states that that they wanted to
share with us. So once again, um
Christopher, we are so happy you're
here. Those of us who will stay on will
do, but I've previewed your slides and
they're great. So um just keep in mind
the time crunch and I will turn it over
to you.
>> No worries. I know how these things go.
Uh thank you very much for the the gift
of extra time. Um and uh so thank you to
the chairs. Thank you senators. Thank
you delegates. Um I have based on the
feedback reworked and out the the
presentation and I will share the
information as
>> Chris. I think we've lost you briefly
>> and yes it appears that
trying to share. Am I back?
>> You are you are back now. Um okay can
you can you try again to share?
>> Yes it restarted my browser when I tried
to share. Let me do it one more time
here.
Okay.
>> Can you see this?
>> We can see it. Yes. Thank you.
>> Right. Fantastic. So look this is going
to be a bit of of a buffet. uh but I
really wanted to highlight uh the
examples that we've seen across the US a
lot of which has been spoken about uh
earlier today um the three broad
categories and of course there are many
use cases for for the use of AI but the
the ones I want to focus on are how we
how we impact citizen services how we
can build for a better economic future
and also how we make every one of us
more productive listening especially to
the last two uh the last two
presentations. It really is about not
adding additional workload, but making
every one of us more capable inside our
roles. So, look, I have about 12
examples here. I'm going to be extremely
brief and then I'll probably just take
some questions.
uh during COVID Illinois Department of
Human Services has a project called
Project Beacon where we combined
services delivery through a number of
different health and human services
organizations
as well as the intake of that
information creating a singular portal
for citizens to be able to to submit
information and that was very
transformative in terms of that that
organization's productivity.
Wisconsin, which is where I'm joining
you from today. Uh it's actually my home
up here in Madison. Uh was a Department
of Workforce Development where again
kicked off during COVID. The the systems
were effectively inundated by
unemployment insurance applications,
many of which were publicly stated,
still being received by fax machines. So
being able to reduce and eliminate a
backlog of some uh something close to
700,000
uh applications in a matter of months
down to a catchup was made possible
through the use of AI's automatic
ability to look at risk inside
documents, digitize documents, and help
the human in the loop, as was discussed
earlier, make that informed decision and
get to that that end result more
quickly.
New York City MTA. We've been working
with the the the MTA to replace or or
improve the the productivity of
maintenance workers rather than having
to continue to, for example, walk tracks
to inspect the the condition of them.
Using devices to to analyze shock, to
analyze sound, and predict with a high
level of of confidence where potential
issues might be. and then allow that
staff to redirect their focus into the
into the high uh into the high-risisk
areas or the most likely areas for there
to be a concern
in Nevada. This is an interesting one uh
that has been an outgrowth of some of
the earlier projects that I that I
discussed here and this is about
automating and making adjudicators for
unemployment much more effective and
much more powerful. We we talked briefly
earlier or it was spoken briefly earlier
about how do we make this easier without
creating additional workload for staff
or making it unnatural for for citizens
to interact. In this scenario, the
system will perform interviews based on
state law and based on uh other
regulations with the employer with the
the affected individual. coales that
information, look for for gaps and
conflicts, conduct follow-up interviews,
and then bring that along with the
transcripts to an adjudicator to make uh
an accelerated and more informed
decision. So for us, this is an example
that that can really be relayed into a
lot of the new demands that we are
seeing that require us to be able to
collect more information more quickly in
a in a very natural manner and still
have that human in the loop that that
decision-making process be performed by
by staff.
Two examples here of of transportation
uh both in Texas and in Oklahoma. This
is really around predictive traffic flow
as well as automating the monitoring of
infrastructure allowing the the AI to
perform analysis on data that is
collected. You know, I fully agree with
earlier comments about the garbage in is
garbage out. You need to make sure that
you have
as much good data as you can and when
you don't have a complete picture,
understand what that what that risk is.
You know, Chris's view is still progress
forward, but do it with a with a an eyes
wide open approach that you need to
recognize this might be a PC, this might
be a test bed versus something that can
be easily moved into production.
There are a number of examples around
how we are trying to improve uh outcomes
by by helping focus on on economic
future. This uh very recent I think is
in June we we opened a partnership with
University of Maryland system for
education in AI improving AI skills uh
among students uh anyone that is uh in
that system resulting in a Google AI
certificate that will help them
understand a bit more of the art of the
possible become more comfortable and and
really understand how the tools have
changed uh since you know as they do
every six months.
I'm going to very briefly Allen
Institute, we collaborate with them for
creating open-source foundation models
that are really focused on research and
science and medicine. These models and
their weights and their training data
are all made publicly available.
Wayne State University. This is a
multiaceted partnership uh that started
out also with the the city of Dearbornne
and focused around how do we improve the
process of the community health needs
assessment as opposed to creating a
static report that exists as that going
forward. How can we automate the the
collection of of surveys of of
individuals in the in the city? How can
we create and and this is what we ended
up doing, creating a a portal that
dynamically updates uh in near real time
with the latest information that then
not only allows you to very quickly
create a community health needs
assessment to be sent to the proper
authorities, but also gives you an
interactive platform the other 364 days
of the year that you can use to answer
questions and to really uh
empower your employees to to make
informed decisions.
State of Oklahoma similar process uh
similar to to what we do in other states
with growth Google and this was largely
tied to a diversionary
uh program where the intent was to
identify high-risisk individuals in the
state and redirect them with new skills.
a number of these cases that where they
have become uh employees of different
agencies in the state of Oklahoma which
has been a fantastic outcome.
Hawaii Department of Transportation this
is about making future decisions with
the uh with with the view of how climate
change can will impact the the
infrastructure of the state. And then
the last category that I'll dive into
here is examples of uh these are a
little bit more gray, but these are
these are these are measured examples of
how the tools in general can help us as
uh or you as employees or your agency
employees really perform the dayto-day
job uh at at a higher level. So the
state of uh state of Colorado as you can
see here using it to to automatically
summarize large documentation
and improve the communication skill.
This is a PC uh Indiana Department of
Transportation responding to an
executive order that required them to
review mandates of many agencies across
the state and was able to condense the
amount of time that that took uh
considerably. And then the last is a
little bit of a a segue and just a
comment that quite often AI is
considered as as just that tool or that
direct tool. One of the approaches that
we take with you know the many different
platforms that Google has is how do we
improve the functioning of those
existing tools uh of those existing
applications with AI. How do we do this
in a responsible measured way and
management of of cyber security is
certainly one of those uh you know bad
actors use AI the good actors certainly
need to as well. So allowing those who
are on the state side to to span across
a much larger set of data, analyze it
much more quickly and be able to keep up
with that everchanging landscape is a is
a really good outcome. Again, I will
send this information through. Happy to
take questions. Thank you for for
staying extra. And uh that is that is it
for myself.
That was fascinating, uh, Christopher,
and I appreciate you going at at
breakneck speed there.
>> Um,
I just I have one question. I don't I
didn't know if anybody else has any. Um,
I was just curious, out of all those
examples that you showed us, where do
you think the biggest cost savings are
for a state like Maryland?
>> Yes. So I think that the largest cost
savings that I've seen probably in
general I think would would apply in
Maryland as well is a scenario where you
have a lot of heavy document analysis
that is done by humans currently. So
again, unemployment adjudication or when
we're taking a look at benefits analysis
or or benefit redeterminations,
every one of those that is is uh is
takes a lot of human time to to analyze
and analyze correctly. We find that is a
step in the in the overall process that
can be condensed and and observed or
managed as opposed to being done
directly by an individual.
>> That makes sense, Senator Rosett.
>> Yeah, thank you. Um we are piloting in
Maryland um AI high dosage uh tutoring
and it occurred to me listening to some
of these presentations are people moving
using AI for counseling I I don't I
don't mean mental health counseling I
mean school counseling
>> yes uh and I apologize you know there
are a lot of examples I didn't have time
to get to for example we are rolling out
with the University of Michigan a uh
virtual TA which is intended as that
guide and they have signed on 17 or 18
other universities to trial that with
them. So that provides, you know, it's
and it's rolls alongside personalized
learning systems, but the the concept
really is this this counselor is present
with you in your early days and as as
you go through your your
>> I get I get I get what TAS are, but I'm
really asking in terms of public school
K12 counseling, which is all about
scheduling, all about choosing courses,
all about that kind of stuff. That's
incredibly timeintensive, has to be
personalized and everybody's short of
counselors. That's why I'm asking do you
have any know anybody doing that to your
knowledge?
>> There is uh I don't have a ready example
but there are significant scenarios
where with AIdriven personalized
learning systems that are in place at
the K through2 level.
>> Okay. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
>> Yeah.
>> Thank you. Um, and one final question to
leave you with, Christopher. You know
what I've been thinking about is that
there are these future cost savings,
right? But sometimes they require this
initial upfront investment. Have you
seen another state where there's some
kind of financial model? Like we used to
do this with energy efficiency, right?
Like you would make an energy efficiency
investment and you get paid back over
time. Um, is there anything like that
with AI that you've seen?
I I would say and I think this model was
described earlier too in terms of like
the year one outlay versus the ongoing
outlay. I've seen that pretty frequently
in in terms of how we can measure over
time and really start to to see the
clear payback in year two, year three,
year four.
If I I'm I'm trying to recall the the
the person who was talking about this
but was the the concept is that once you
have that tool in house I think it was
it was a gentleman from Oregon you have
the ability to then extend that that
capability much more broadly
horizontally across other use cases
where that investment is then very
minimal and that along with the staff's
ability to understand or comfort level
to tackle other challenges that allows
you to skip past a full reinvestment of
of of the same manner in which you
started.
>> Yeah. No, I think for for states that do
like one year budgeting at a time, it's
I'm actually looking for like a
financial mechanism that we can use
somehow to pay ourselves back in the
future. So, um I don't probably like a a
market out there in AI savings
somewhere.
>> Yes. Yes, I I I hesitate to get too much
into the salesy side of it, but we do
have financial constructs that allow us
to be able to uh even out and also also
understand future spend without having
to
providing consistency across multiple
years at a one year at a time,
>> right? Okay. Fabulous. Well, thank you
so much for hanging in there past the
one o'clock mark. Um, I do think that if
you're able to send your your examples
through, we'll we'll read them. Plus,
there's more people watching, you know,
on the YouTube channel. So, thank you so
much. Um, thank you members for sticking
with us. Um, and look forward to talking
with you all again soon. Have a great
afternoon, everyone.
>> Thanks.
>> Thank you, staff. Appreciate you all so
much.